Review
Remodeling of the Intracardiac Ganglia During the Development
of Cardiovascular Autonomic Dysfunction in Type 2 Diabetes:
Molecular Mechanisms and Therapeutics

Anthony J. Evans 1

and Yu-Long Li 1,2,*

1 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA;

antevans@unmc.edu

2 Department of Cellular & Integrative Physiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center,

Omaha, NE 68198, USA

* Correspondence: yulongli@unmc.edu; Tel.: +1-402-559-3016; Fax: +1-402-559-9659

Abstract: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is one of the most significant health issues worldwide, with
associated healthcare costs estimated to surpass USD 1054 billion by 2045. The leading cause of death
in T2DM patients is the development of cardiovascular disease (CVD). In the early stages of T2DM,
patients develop cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction due to the withdrawal of cardiac parasym-
pathetic activity. Diminished cardiac parasympathetic tone can lead to cardiac arrhythmia-related
sudden cardiac death, which accounts for 50% of CVD-related deaths in T2DM patients. Regulation of
cardiovascular parasympathetic activity is integrated by neural circuitry at multiple levels including
afferent, central, and efferent components. Efferent control of cardiac parasympathetic autonomic
tone is mediated through the activity of preganglionic parasympathetic neurons located in the cardiac
extensions of the vagus nerve that signals to postganglionic parasympathetic neurons located in the
intracardiac ganglia (ICG) on the heart. Postganglionic parasympathetic neurons exert local control
on the heart, independent of higher brain centers, through the release of neurotransmitters, such
as acetylcholine. Structural and functional alterations in cardiac parasympathetic postganglionic
neurons contribute to the withdrawal of cardiac parasympathetic tone, resulting in arrhythmogenesis
and sudden cardiac death. This review provides an overview of the remodeling of parasympathetic
postganglionic neurons in the ICG, and potential mechanisms contributing to the withdrawal of
cardiac parasympathetic tone, ventricular arrhythmogenesis, and sudden cardiac death in T2DM. Im-
proving cardiac parasympathetic tone could be a therapeutic avenue to reduce malignant ventricular
arrhythmia and sudden cardiac death, increasing both the lifespan and improving quality of life of
T2DM patients.

Keywords: type 2 diabetes mellitus; intracardiac ganglia; autonomic dysfunction; ventricular
arrhythmia; sudden cardiac death

1. Introduction

Diabetes is one of the most common diseases worldwide, with type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) making up over 90% of all diabetes cases [1–3]. T2DM impacts approximately 1 in
11 adults and is becoming significantly more prevalent each year [1]. It is estimated that
T2DM will impact 783 million individuals worldwide by the year 2045 with associated
healthcare costs to surpass USD 1054 billion [4]. T2DM is characterized by the development
of reduced insulin sensitivity and subsequent insulin resistance, ultimately leading to poor
glycemic control and prolonged episodes of severe hyperglycemia [5]. The long-term lack of
glycemic control leads to systemic problems, with the T2DM patient population developing
many associated comorbidities including nephropathy [6], retinopathy [7], neuropathy [8],
and cardiovascular disease [9]. The high incidence, paired with the severe global financial
burden of diabetes, necessitates further exploration of the pathophysiological mechanisms

Citation: Evans, A.J.; Li, Y.-L.

Remodeling of the Intracardiac

Ganglia During the Development of

Cardiovascular Autonomic

Dysfunction in Type 2 Diabetes:

Molecular Mechanisms and

Therapeutics. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25,

12464. https://doi.org/10.3390/

ijms252212464

Academic Editors: Andrea Borghini,

Antonio Rizza and Alessandro

Tonacci

Received: 24 September 2024

Revised: 15 November 2024

Accepted: 16 November 2024

Published: 20 November 2024

Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms252212464

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

2 of 28

of T2DM development in the hopes of creating more efficacious and affordable treatments
for diabetes patients.

In 2021, the International Diabetes Federation reported that approximately 6.7 million
adults between the ages of 20 and 79 died from diabetes or related complications [10]. The
leading cause of mortality in T2DM patients is the development of cardiovascular disease
(CVD) [9,11]. Adults with T2DM develop CVD approximately 14.6 years earlier than those
unaffected by T2DM, and the risk of CVD increases with elevated levels of fasting blood glu-
cose [11–14]. Diabetic patients are more likely to experience severe cardiovascular events,
with T2DM patients having a 53% greater risk of myocardial infarction (MI), 58% greater
risk of stroke, and 112% greater risk of developing heart failure, as compared to individuals
unaffected by T2DM [11]. Over 70% of diabetic patients die from a cardiovascular-related
event, with over 50% of these resulting in sudden cardiac death (SCD) [15–17]. SCD in
T2DM patients has been linked to MI [18], with half of MI-related SCD being attributed to
ventricular arrhythmias thought to be brought on by damage caused by previous cardio-
vascular ischemic events [15,16,19]. Ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation (VT/VF) has been
reported to result in decreased stroke volume, leading to pulselessness and sudden death
within one hour of development [20,21]. A recent study of over 600,000 T2DM patients
showed that individuals with T2DM had an 18% greater risk of developing VT/VF [22], and
ventricular arrhythmias have been reported to account for one-third of all abnormal heart
rhythms recorded at the time of cardiac arrest in T2DM patients [13,21]. While glycemic
control is the gold standard approach for treating diabetes, multiple studies have reported
that tight glycemic control alone does not significantly reduce cardiovascular event-related
deaths in T2DM patients [23–25]. The high prevalence of ventricular arrhythmia-related
SCD in T2DM patients, and the current lack of efficacious treatments to prevent SCD, has
led to an increased focus on elucidating the mechanisms responsible for ventricular ar-
rhythmogenesis, which is crucial in the endeavor to develop new therapeutic interventions
aimed at improving the prognosis and reducing mortality of SCD in T2DM.

Cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction, such as sympathetic nerve overactivation and
withdrawal of parasympathetic activity, is a common complication of T2DM [26–29]. One
previous study suggested that the function of the vagal nerve, the primary driver of cardiac
parasympathetic activity, is severely compromised in T2DM patients [30]. Withdrawal of
cardiac vagal activity develops in T2DM patients [31–33] and has been associated with the
development of malignant ventricular arrhythmia and SCD [34–37]. Regulation of cardiac
vagal activity can be integrated by the regulatory circuitry at multiple levels including
vagal nerve afferent at baroreceptors, central components, and efferent components (car-
diac vagal ganglia) [38]. Although structural and functional alterations in every site of
the circuitry could cause attenuation of cardiac vagal activity, impairment of cardiac vagal
postganglionic (CVP) parasympathetic neurons located in the intracardiac ganglia (ICG)
might be an important factor for the withdrawal of cardiac vagal activity in T2DM, because
(1) cardiac vagal ganglionic neurons provide local neural coordination independent of
higher brain centers [39–42]; (2) acetylcholine (ACh) release from cardiac vagal neurons
is blunted in T2DM patients [43]; (3) our previous study found that the cell excitability of
CVP neurons was reduced due to a lower expression of voltage-gated Ca++ channels in
T2DM rats [44]. Clinical studies and animal experiments support the notion that structural
and functional remodeling of ICG neurons contributes to cardiac vagal withdrawal and the
subsequent development of malignant ventricular arrhythmia in T2DM [45–48], but a com-
prehensive evaluation of the data has not yet been presented. Therefore, in this review, we
discuss the T2DM-induced remodeling of ICG, molecular mechanisms contributing to ICG
remodeling, and the potential role that the remodeling of CVP parasympathetic neurons
plays in cardiovascular parasympathetic withdrawal, ventricular arrhythmogenesis, and
SCD in T2DM.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

3 of 28

2. The Intrinsic Cardiac Nervous System
2.1. Anatomy of the Cardiac Parasympathetic Nervous System and Intrinsic Cardiac
Nervous System

The physiological control of hemodynamic parameters such as heart rate, conduction
velocity, and force of cardiac contraction is the result of a summative response of two com-
peting divisions of the autonomic nervous system: the parasympathetic and sympathetic
nervous system [49–51]. The parasympathetic nervous system is composed of pre- and
postganglionic neurons that transmit signals to cardiac, respiratory, and endocrine organs,
among others, and regulate a variety of functions [49,52,53]. Parasympathetic innervation
of the heart begins with the cardiac vagal parasympathetic preganglionic neurons whose
axons extend from the dorsal vagal motor nucleus (DVMN) and the nucleus ambiguus (NA)
through the cardiac extension of the left and right vagal trunks and synapses onto efferent
CVP neurons located in the ICG, found in the epicardial fat pads of the posterior atria,
atrioventricular, and intraventricular grooves [40,54,55]. These postganglionic cholinergic
neurons make up a large portion of the intrinsic cardiac nervous system (ICNS) (discussed
below) that projects throughout the heart [54,56] (Figure 1).

Figure 1. A schematic diagram of the anatomy and physiology of cardiac parasympathetic innervation
of the heart. GPA: ganglionic parasympathetic axon, GPN: ganglionic parasympathetic neuron, ACh:
acetylcholine, MCR: muscarinic cholinergic receptor, nAChR: nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Figure
was created in BioRender.com.

The ICNS is the final level of neural integration controlling autonomic efferent cardiac
function. The ICNS is composed of a network of ICG made up of 200–1000 neurons
each [40,56]. These ICGs are connected to adjacent ganglia via interneurons creating a
ganglionated plexus (GP). These GPs act as centers of integration and control for the
heart [57,58]. The size, composition, and anatomical distribution of the GPs located in
epicardial fat pads varies across species, with larger species (i.e., humans and pigs) having
more dispersion and higher density of innervation of cells bodies as compared to smaller
species (i.e., rats and mice) [56,59–62]. Anatomical studies of GPs in rat hearts report
that GPs are concentrated in three distinct regions of the heart: (1) at the junction of the

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464 3 of 27   2. The Intrinsic Cardiac Nervous System 2.1. Anatomy of the Cardiac Parasympathetic Nervous System and Intrinsic Cardiac Nervous System The physiological control of hemodynamic parameters such as heart rate, conduction velocity, and force of cardiac contraction is the result of a summative response of two competing divisions of the autonomic nervous system: the parasympathetic and sympa-thetic nervous system [49–51]. The parasympathetic nervous system is composed of pre- and postganglionic neurons that transmit signals to cardiac, respiratory, and endocrine organs, among others, and regulate a variety of functions [49,52,53]. Parasympathetic in-nervation of the heart begins with the cardiac vagal parasympathetic preganglionic neu-rons whose axons extend from the dorsal vagal motor nucleus (DVMN) and the nucleus ambiguus (NA) through the cardiac extension of the left and right vagal trunks and syn-apses onto efferent CVP neurons located in the ICG, found in the epicardial fat pads of the posterior atria, atrioventricular, and intraventricular grooves [40,54,55]. These post-ganglionic cholinergic neurons make up a large portion of the intrinsic cardiac nervous system (ICNS) (discussed below) that projects throughout the heart [54,56] (Figure 1).  Figure 1. A schematic diagram of the anatomy and physiology of cardiac parasympathetic innerva-tion of the heart. GPA: ganglionic parasympathetic axon, GPN: ganglionic parasympathetic neuron, ACh: acetylcholine, MCR: muscarinic cholinergic receptor, nAChR: nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Figure was created in BioRender.com. The ICNS is the final level of neural integration controlling autonomic efferent cardiac function. The ICNS is composed of a network of ICG made up of 200–1000 neurons each [40,56]. These ICGs are connected to adjacent ganglia via interneurons creating a ganglionated plexus (GP). These GPs act as centers of integration and control for the heart [57,58]. The size, composition, and anatomical distribution of the GPs located in epicardial fat pads varies across species, with larger species (i.e., humans and pigs) having more dispersion and higher Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

4 of 28

right superior vena cava and right atrium, close to the junction of the right cardiac vagal
branch and right atrium, adjacent to the sinoatrial node (SA node); (2) at the junction of
the pulmonary veins that drain into the right inferior aspect of the left atrium, adjacent
to the atrioventricular node (AV node); and (3) the left superior sides of the pulmonary
veins at the border of the left atrium [63,64]. A study of GPs in mice found that all GPs
were clustered on the dorsal side of the heart adjacent to the pulmonary veins, and varying
numbers of ganglia were found in each mouse, ranging from 13 to 23 [62]. Human GPs are
concentrated in seven distinct sub-regions: the left and right coronary, the left and middle
dorsal, the ventral left and ventral right atrial, and the dorsal right atrial [54,56]. These GPs
singularly and/or synergistically regulate the activity of key heart structures, such as the
SA node and AV node, as well as the right and left atria and ventricles [42,57]. For example,
in humans, the nerves derived from the left coronary, middle dorsal, and the dorsal right
atrial regions innervate the pulmonary veins [65,66]. Similarly, the GP located in the dorsal
right atrial region also exhibits control over the SA node [66,67]. In rats, stimulation of
the ganglia located between the superior vena cava and aorta, adjacent to the SA node,
induced elongation of the P-P interval, resulting in bradycardia [63]. The regulation of the
neurochemical signaling through these GPs is what controls the heart rhythm from beat
to beat.

2.2. Neurophysiology of the Cardiac Parasympathetic Nervous System and Intracardiac Ganglia

Under physiological conditions, the parasympathetic nervous system is responsible
for regulating homeostatic parameters of many tissues in the body, especially mediating
the “rest-and-digest” response which keeps the body’s heart rate, metabolic rate, and
respiratory rate consistent in times in which the body is safe and calm [50,68,69]. Com-
munication from cardiac efferent preganglionic neurons to CVP neurons located in the
ICG occurs primarily through the release of ACh from preganglionic neurons which binds
with nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) expressed on the membrane of the CVP
neurons, but nitric oxide (NO) and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) have also been
reported [40,70,71]. Postsynaptic nAChR activation in CVP neurons induces cell excita-
tion through the modulation of activity of neuronal ion channels such as nAChR, Ca++,
K+, and Na+ voltage-gated channels [46,72–75]. Excited CVP neurons exert their effect
within the ICG via the release of chemical stimuli, which in turn propagates that signal to
other local circuit and efferent neurons prompting the appropriate modulation to cardiac
response, named as the little brain on the heart [76,77]. Recent studies have elucidated
that the ICG neurons are made up of a heterogeneous cell population of cholinergic and
adrenergic neurons [59,78,79]. Using double immunostaining, Horackova et al. charac-
terized intracardiac neurons in guinea pigs, finding that the majority (75–100%) of ICG
neurons exhibited cholinergic characteristics (choline acetyltransferase; ChAT+), while less
than 10% of ICG neurons were considered adrenergic (tyrosine hydroxylase; TH+) [80].
These results were further supported by Tompkins et al., showing that in mice, pigs, and
humans, there were large populations of postganglionic cholinergic neurons (vesicular
acetylcholine transporter; VAChT+) in epicardial ganglia, whereas for some neuronal cell
bodies in all species stained with TH+, only human nerve terminals exhibited any level
of TH+ staining [59]. There were no ICG neurons stained with neurosubstance P (SP) and
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) (two sensory neuronal markers) in mice, pigs, and
humans [59]. Similarly, in rats, all ICG neurons were stained with ChAT+. While nerve
fibers within the rat ganglia stained positive for the sympathetic nerve markers TH and
pituitary adenylate cyclase-activated peptide, neither of these markers were detected in
ICG neuronal cell bodies [61]. Additionally, sensory neurons were not found in rat ICG [61].
While these studies support the notion that parasympathetic tone is the primary regulator
of CVP neuron activity, it is possible that sympathetic and sensory nerve fibers innervate
the ICG to modulate the function of the postganglionic parasympathetic neurons.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

5 of 28

ACh released from postganglionic parasympathetic nerve terminals exerts its effect
through the activation of the muscarinic cholinergic receptors (including M1–M5 subtypes);
a family of G-protein coupled receptors [81]. The M cholinergic receptors exhibit a tissue
specific expression, with M2 receptors being the predominant muscarinic cholinergic
receptors in cardiac tissue. The M1 and M3 receptors have also been reported to be
expressed in the heart, but to a much lesser extent [82–84]. The M2 cholinergic receptors
exert chronotropic effects through multiple intracellular signaling pathways. M2 receptor
activation causes the Gβγ subunits to dissociate from the receptor and in turn directly
activate acetylcholine-sensitive potassium channels, resulting in changes in the potassium
current, and ultimately inducing cell hyperpolarization [85]. The M2 receptor activation
at the SA node and AV node results in hyperpolarization of the nodes, which in turn
decreases cardiac conduction velocity, reduces atrial contraction force, and ultimately
induces bradycardia [85–88].

Acetylcholine-activated M2 cholinergic receptors also contribute to heart homeostasis
more indirectly through their impact on the levels of the second messenger cyclic AMP
(cAMP). The sympathetic nervous system primarily initiates its excitatory response in
cardiac tissue through stimulating cAMP production and therefore activating downstream
cAMP-dependent pathways [49]. Upon ACh stimulation, the Gi subunit of the M2 mus-
carinic GPCR dissociates from the receptor and directly inhibits adenylyl cyclase, a key
enzyme responsible for converting ATP into cAMP, ultimately reducing intracellular cAMP
levels [89,90]. As such, activated M2 receptors act as an antagonizing force against the
elevation of heart rate brought on by the sympathetic nervous system.

Alteration of the structure and/or function of the CVP parasympathetic neurons with
their efferent nerves has serious implications on the homeostasis of the heart. Changes in
the ICNS and associated nerves have been implicated in many cardiac pathophysiological
conditions, such as atrial fibrillation, ventricular arrhythmia, and MI [91–93]. As such, in
the following sections of this review, we elucidate the relationship between remodeling
of the cardiac parasympathetic nervous system and the development of cardiovascular
autonomic dysregulation in T2DM.

3. Remodeling of CVP Parasympathetic Neurons and Its Role in Cardiac Vagal
Withdrawal, Malignant Ventricular Arrhythmia, and Sudden Cardiac Death in T2DM

Diabetic cardiac autonomic neuropathy (DCAN) is a common pathophysiology shared
among T2DM patients, with 15% to 42% of T2DM patients reporting symptoms of cardiac
autonomic dysregulation [94,95]. Imbalance between the sympathetic and parasympathetic
inputs to the heart have previously been reported as a driver of ventricular arrhythmogenic-
ity [35,96]. While the role of altered cardiac sympathetic activity in arrhythmia development
in T2DM patients has been extensively reviewed [29,97,98], the exact mechanism leading
to T2DM-induced withdrawal of cardiac parasympathetic tone has not yet been fully es-
tablished. Diminished cardiac vagal parasympathetic activity is one of the first indicators
of DCAN, often beginning to develop even before diabetes has been diagnosed [99,100].
As of now, a systematic evaluation of the impact of T2DM-induced CVP parasympathetic
neuron remodeling in the ICG on the development of malignant ventricular arrhythmia
and SCD has not yet been performed. Previous studies, including our work, have reported
structural and functional changes in CVP parasympathetic neurons in T2DM models that
contribute to ventricular arrhythmogenesis and SCD [45,46,48].

3.1. Cardiac Parasympathetic Withdrawal in T2DM

DCAN can develop as a result of dysregulation of the cardiac sympathetic branch,
cardiac parasympathetic branch, or simultaneous dysregulation of both branches [101].
DCAN development is characterized in three stages. Stage 1 is preclinical with patients
exhibiting decreased baroreflex sensitivity and an abnormal sympathovagal balance. Stage
2 patients experience cardiac tachycardia at rest. Patients classified as stage 3 develop
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular dysfunction, orthostatic hypertension, and silent

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

6 of 28

myocardial ischemia [102–104]. One study of 165 patients diagnosed with diabetes mel-
litus reports that individuals with diabetes exhibit a resting vagal tone that is 40% lower
than healthy individuals [105]. Withdrawal of cardiac vagal parasympathetic tone has
been reported to predate cardiac sympathetic dysfunction in T2DM patients, resulting in
sympathetic overactivation leading to arrhythmogenesis and SCD [106,107].

Cardiac vagal parasympathetic withdrawal in T2DM patients is diagnosed through
indices, such as elevated resting heart rate (HR), reduced heart rate variability (HRV), and
a diminished baroreflex response [99–101]. It is believed that T2DM individuals exhibit
an increased HR due to unopposed sympathetic outflow with cardiac parasympathetic
withdrawal [99,107]. One of the most common clinical manifestations of parasympathetic
withdrawal in T2DM patients is a reduction in HRV. Reduced HRV in T2DM patients
has been associated with age, HbA1c levels, hyperglycemia, serum insulin levels, as well
as the development of hepatic steatosis [32,33,108]. In a study of forty T2DM patients
with an average duration of diabetes of 9.5 years, Ramussen et al. found that T2DM
patients experienced reduced parasympathetic activity, as measured by a reduced deep
breathing expiratory/inspiratory ratio (E/I ratio), and reduced HRV, while no significant
changes in sympathetic activity were observed [101]. A meta-analysis of HRV in T2DM
including 25 case-controlled studies consisting of 1356 T2DM patients revealed T2DM
patients showed significantly reduced HRV parameters including reduced RR intervals
and lower high frequency power (one index of cardiac parasympathetic activation in HRV
analysis) [109]. A similar cross-sectional study of 160 T2DM patients stratified by disease
duration found that all T2DM patients with disease durations ranging from less than 5 years
to greater than 10 years exhibited lower HRV, whereas no changes in HRV were observed
in healthy subjects, or patients diagnosed with prediabetes [110].

The baroreflex is regulated at multiple levels including peripheral afferent nerves
located at baroreceptors, a central component, and efferent components including sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic nerves [111]. Alterations in any site of the arterial baroreflex
arc can contribute to cardiac parasympathetic nervous withdrawal. Previous studies have
shown that parasympathetic preganglionic neurons found in the NA extensively project
via the vagus nerve to the ICG, and that baroreflex control is abrogated when domoic
acid lesions in the NA blocks projections to the ICG [112,113]. Furthermore, pharmaco-
logical inhibition of DMVN neurons has been shown to lower the ventricular effective
refractory period, prolong QTc intervals, and trigger ventricular tachycardia [47]. At-
tenuation in baroreflex sensitivity has been widely associated with T2DM [114–116] and
linked to arrhythmogenesis and SCD [117,118]. Therefore, elucidating mechanisms driving
diminished cardiac parasympathetic tone is essential in the effort to prevent ventricular
arrhythmogenesis and SCD in T2DM patients.

3.2. Structural Remodeling of Intracardiac Ganglia in T2DM

The terminal mediator of cardiac parasympathetic tone is CVP parasympathetic neu-
rons located in the ICG that exert cardiac control through the release of neurotransmitters,
such as ACh and NO, which bind to receptors on the surface of cardiomyocytes. While
alterations in neuron structure have been reported to contribute to the development of
diabetic neuropathy [119], the data on the structural changes in ICG neurons as T2DM
develops is limited. In a study of Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats, a genetic model of T2DM, im-
munohistochemistry of AChE-stained intact hearts revealed T2DM rats exhibited a reduced
total number of ICG. The loss of ganglia appeared to be regionally specific as significantly
fewer ganglia were found at the heart hilum, but no difference was observed in the number
of ganglia in the dorsal atrial region. In both regions, the total area of each ICG was signifi-
cantly reduced [48]. Furthermore, examination of neuronal soma revealed each T2DM ICG
had fewer total numbers of neuronal soma, and each soma size was smaller as compared to
controls [48]. Similar results were observed in a streptozotocin (STZ)-induced rat diabetes
model, with 8-week diabetic rats exhibiting reduced numbers of ICG neurons in ganglia
isolated from the vena cava, aorta, posterior left, and posterior right atrium. Transverse

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

7 of 28

sections of the diabetic heart showed that diabetic ICG neurons exhibited smaller diameters
consistent with the results of the Batulevicius et al. study [120]. Examination of sections
of the STZ-diabetic rat posterior heart wall, using electron microscopy, revealed that the
degeneration of ICG dendrites, axon terminals, and myelinated axons begins during the
acute phase of diabetes induction (days 3–7), and degeneration became progressively
worse between 1 and 6 months post-induction [121]. A study of human diabetic cardiac
ganglionic cells, isolated by autopsy, noted that neurons in cardiac ganglia obtained from
patients categorized as having severe diabetes exhibited cellular contraction, cytoplasmic
condensation, widening of inter-neuronal spaces, and poor Nissl staining. No neurolytic
phenomena was observed in cardiac ganglia neurons isolated from non-diabetic or mildly
diabetic patients [122]. While these studies in diabetic rodent models and humans seem to
support the notion that T2DM induces morphological changes in cardiac ganglia neurons,
further studies examining specific sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve markers in
ICG could be used to more definitively demarcate the difference in the impact T2DM has
on structural changes of cardiac sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation. Further
investigations of the changes in structures and functions of subcellular organelles, such as
the mitochondria, nucleus, and endoplasmic reticulum, could aid in the understanding of
the intracellular mechanisms driving T2DM-induced structural ICG remodeling.

3.3. Functional Remodeling of Intracardiac Ganglia Neurons in T2DM

Neuronal function, mediated through the propagation of action potentials, is to relay
messages throughout the body, over varying distances. Cardiac vagal nerve activity is
decreased in T2DM, which can be attributed to reduced cardiac parasympathetic postgan-
glionic nerve activity [45,101], and disruption in CVP parasympathetic neuron activity
has been linked to ventricular arrhythmogenesis [45,123]. Studies have demonstrated
that CVP parasympathetic neurons isolated from the ICG of a high-fat diet (HFD) with
a low dose of STZ-induced T2DM rat hearts exhibit reduced cell excitability and lower
frequency of action potentials, indicating ICG neuron dysfunction [44–46]. As action poten-
tials are induced through changes in membrane potential, studies on T2DM ICG neuron
dysfunction have primarily centered on T2DM-induced changes in ion channel expression
and function. While various classes of ion channels are involved in the generation and
propagation of action potentials, voltage-gated Ca++ channels have previously been shown
to play a role in the rising phase of ICG neuron action potentials [124]. Upon examination
of Ca++ currents in CVP neurons isolated from rat hearts, Liu et al. reports that T2DM CVP
neurons exhibit reduced calcium currents, indicating calcium channel dysfunction [44].
Five subtypes of calcium channels (T, L, N, P/Q, and R) have been characterized in the
central and peripheral nervous system, and the pharmacological and biophysical properties
of all calcium channels are determined by the alpha subunit [125]. Expression of three major
gene families determine the calcium channel subtype: Cav1 family (Cav1.1, Cav1.2, and
Cav1.3) encoding L-type calcium channels, Cav2 family encodes P/Q (Cav2.1), N (Cav2.2)
and R (Cav2.3)-type calcium channels, and Cav3 encodes T-type calcium channels [125]. It
has been previously demonstrated that low-threshold calcium channels (T-type) are not
expressed in rat ICG [124]. Immunofluorescence staining and RT-qPCR of CVP neurons
isolated from rat hearts found that the Cav1 and Cav2 gene families are expressed in CVP
neurons, and T2DM specifically reduces the expression of both the Cav2.2-encoding tran-
script and protein, resulting in diminished N-type calcium channel function and reduced
cell excitability [44]. Inhibition of Cav2.2 expression in T2DM rat CVP neurons was induced
through elevated levels of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) (a type of reactive oxygen species,
ROS) [73]. In vivo reestablishment of catalase expression, a H2O2 scavenger, via microinjec-
tion of an adenovirus carrying the catalase gene sequence into the ICG, decreased H2O2
levels, and improved CVP neuronal excitability, indicating that ROS is a driver of CVP
neuronal dysfunction and ventricular arrhythmias in T2DM rats [73].

Ligand-gated nAChR, which have previously been reported to be expressed in CVP
neurons, play a role in ICG neuronal signaling [126,127]. Cardiac vagal preganglionic

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

8 of 28

neurons extend from the brain (DVMN and NA) and communicate with CVP parasym-
pathetic neurons in ICG through the release of ACh. nAChR receptors on the surface
of CVP neurons are activated and subsequently regulate cell excitability [128]. Liu et al.
demonstrated that CVP neurons from HFD with a low dose of STZ-induced T2DM rats
exhibit reduced nAChR currents, and T2DM rats exhibited reduced HRV in response to
vagal nerve stimulation [46]. The exact mechanism driving reduced nAChR currents in
T2DM rat ICG has not yet been established, as immunofluorescence staining showed no
difference in the expression of the subunits of nAChR (α3 and β4) that control receptor
activation [46]. Potassium voltage-gated channels have also been reported to influence
CVP neuron cell excitability [75], but the impact of T2DM on K+ channel activity in CVP
neurons has not been established. As T2DM has been shown to promote ATP-sensitive K+
channel dysfunction in β-islet cells [129], exploring T2DM-induced changes to K+ channel
function should be further explored.

While the data predominantly support the notion that CVP neuron dysfunction devel-
ops in T2DM and contributes to the development of malignant ventricular arrhythmia, it
should be noted that a recent study by Jungen et al. examined CVP neurons in the db/db
genetic mouse model of T2DM and found that single stimulation of presynaptic input to
CVP neurons results in a suprathreshold excitatory postsynaptic potential, which induced
action potentials, indicating no dysfunction in cardiac postganglionic parasympathetic
signaling [97]. Furthermore, immunofluorescence staining of VAChT, a cholinergic nerve
marker, in ICG showed no changes in the number of parasympathetic ICG neurons in
T2DM mice [97]. The conflicting results of this as compared to other studies could be
attributed to different T2DM models. As db/db mice are diabetic due to homozygous
inheritance of defective leptin receptor alleles, the molecular pathogenesis that leads to the
diabetic state (hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia etc.) may be different than an HFD with
a low dose of STZ-induced diabetic model, where β-islet cell dysfunction is chemically
induced. Furthermore, the interspecies variability of cardiac neuroanatomy may play a
role. The mouse vagus nerve is composed of a single fascicle as compared to the multiple
fascicles found in humans [130], and the distribution of cardiac GPs in mice, rat, and human
hearts varies (see Section 2.1). As anatomical remodeling of rat ICG in response to T2DM
shows regional specificity, with reductions in GP density at the heart hilum but not at
the dorsal atrial region, while mice GPs are only clustered at the dorsal side of the heart
adjacent to the pulmonary veins, it is possible that mice CVP neurons may be more resistant
to structural and functional remodeling to preserve cardiac autonomic function, as they
lack compensatory GPs located in other heart regions [48,62].

3.4. Changes in M2 Muscarinic Receptors in T2DM Rat Hearts

One potential consequence of reduced ICG excitation is the attenuated release of ACh
from CVP parasympathetic nerve terminals. Reduced activation of ACh-sensitive M2
muscarinic receptors on cardiomyocytes can also cause dysregulated intracardiac signaling,
resulting in cardiac arrhythmogenesis [87,131,132]. We have recently identified attenuated
ACh release from CVP nerve terminals in T2DM rat hearts [133]. One previous study
also found that the atria of human patients with late-stage diabetic complications exhibit
reduced ACh levels [43]. While it is also possible that dysfunction in M2 receptor signaling
could contribute to T2DM-induced cardiac dysfunction, a previous study reported that
T2DM rat hearts exhibited no significant difference in M2 receptor expression as compared
to healthy controls [134]. Furthermore, our data from isolated Langendorff-perfused
hearts demonstrated that there is no significant difference on the sensitivity of the heart
to exogenous ACh treatment in sham and T2DM rats, which indicates that changes of
the heart (including M2 receptors) might not be involved in the impairment of cardiac
vagal activation in T2DM [46]. While T2DM-induced changes in intracellular signaling
pathways in cardiomyocytes is outside of the scope of this review, it should be noted
that T2DM-induced changes in the structure or function of the myocardium can also be a
contributor to ventricular arrhythmia development [98,135].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

9 of 28

4. Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms Contributing to T2DM-Induced Cardiovascular
Parasympathetic Withdrawal and Ventricular Arrhythmogenesis
4.1. Insulin Resistance, Glucose Toxicity, and Oxidative Stress

Insulin resistance is a common pathophysiology in T2DM patients, which has been
associated with the development of cardiac autonomic dysfunction [136]. Insulin resistance
occurs when cells experience diminished sensitivity to insulin, resulting in prolonged
episodes of hyperglycemia [137,138]. While glucose uptake is an essential component for
maintaining neuronal homeostasis, the prolonged exposure to elevated glucose levels in-
duces glucotoxicity [139–141]. Glucotoxicity alters neuronal structure and function through
multiple mechanisms, including an increase in the activity of the polyol/sorbitol path-
way [142–144] and the production of advanced glycation end products (AGE) [145–147],
which contribute to the accumulation of ROS and induce inflammation [148–151].

The polyol/sorbitol pathway has been extensively studied as a link between hyper-
glycemia and neuropathy in T2DM patients [144,152,153]. In physiological conditions,
glucose is converted to glucose-6-phosphate and subsequently shuttled into glycolysis.
When glucose levels are in excess, glucose is reduced to sorbitol, and NADPH is concur-
rently oxidized to NADP+ through the activity of aldolase reductase [142,154]. Sorbitol
is then subsequently oxidized to fructose and contributes to the production of AGE (see
below) [155]. Elevation of sorbitol levels has been associated with increased intracellular
osmotic stress [156]. Furthermore, when aldolase reductase uses NADPH as a cofactor in
the conversion of glucose to sorbitol, the intracellular NADPH pool becomes depleted. A
reduced NADPH pool results in the decreased levels of reduced glutathione (GSH) [157],
an essential substrate for glutathione peroxidase. Glutathione peroxidase converts H2O2
to water while concurrently oxidizing glutathione. Diminished glutathione peroxidase
activity results in increased intracellular levels of ROS (such as H2O2) [142,154,157]. Many
tissues in diabetic patients have been reported to experience excessive oxidative stress
including the retina, kidney, as well as neurons in the central and peripheral nervous
system [158–161]. Whyte et al. showed that increased levels of ROS in CVP neurons altered
potassium and calcium currents to reduce neuron cell excitability [143]. The role of ROS in
neuronal dysfunction was further supported by some previous studies that demonstrated
that diabetic rats treated with an aldolase reductase inhibitor showed normal glutathione
peroxidase activity, and that reducing oxidative stress attenuated diabetic nerve conduction
deficiency and blood flow issues [162–164]. Campanucci et al. reported that ROS depress
autonomic ganglion synaptic transmission through oxidizing the α3 subunit of nAChR,
which contributes to the increased risk of fatal arrhythmia development [165]. Our studies
have shown that CVP neurons isolated from HFD-low-dose STZ-induced T2DM rats exhibit
elevated levels of H2O2, lower expression of the H2O2 scavenger catalase, and reduced cell
excitability [44,73]. Furthermore, diminished CVP neuronal excitability has been associated
with the development of MI-evoked ventricular arrhythmia [45]. Scavenging of H2O2
via overexpression of exogenous catalase in T2DM rat ICG decreased H2O2 levels and
improved CVP neuronal excitability [73]. Decreased CVP neuron excitability has been
linked to H2O2-induced inhibition of Cav2.2 expression, resulting in diminished calcium
currents in CVP neurons [44]. A recent study in NG108-15 cholinergic cells found that H2O2
induced expression of the repressor element 1-silencing transcription factor (REST) and
reduced Cav2.2 expression [166]. Furthermore, in vivo shRNA-mediated inhibition of REST
expression in CVP neurons in T2DM rat hearts resulted in increased Cav2.2 expression and
improved cardiac vagal function [166].

Prolonged exposure to elevated glucose levels in diabetic patients can result in the
spontaneous, non-enzymatic glycation of both intracellular and extracellular proteins [167].
During the glycation reaction, the carbonyl group of a reducing sugar, such as glucose,
reacts with free amino groups on the side chains of amino acids, such as lysine, to form an
unstable Schiff base. Through a subsequent series of molecular rearrangements, the Schiff
base is converted to create a stable glycated protein identified as an advanced glycation
end product (AGE) [145]. The pathological development of the AGE has been associated

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

10 of 28

with multiple diabetes-associated pathophysiologies, such as atherosclerosis, as well as
both diabetic peripheral and autonomic neuropathies [167–169]. Recent studies have re-
ported that AGE accumulation in skin biopsies of T2DM patients occurs prior to and is
correlated with the subsequent development of cardiac parasympathetic and sympathetic
dysfunction [170,171]. Furthermore, inhibition of AGE formation via administration of
aminoguanidine has been shown to attenuate atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmic sus-
ceptibility in Langendorff perfused type 1 diabetic rat hearts [146]. AGE accumulation may
impact neuronal function through both the alteration of the extracellular matrix structure,
and induction of intracellular signaling pathways [147,172,173]. Glycation of extracellular
matrix proteins, laminin, and collagen type IV have been shown to inhibit axonal regen-
eration in in vitro studies of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons (sensory neurons) [147].
Furthermore, in STZ-induced diabetic mice, DRG neurons exhibited an attenuated ability
to bind extracellular matrix proteins [174]. This could be attributed to glycation-induced
structural changes in ECM binding proteins, such as integrins, which result in a dimin-
ished ability to crosslink to the ECM [175,176]. Similarly, Luo et al. reported that DRG
neurons from STZ-induced diabetic mice grown on glycated ECM substrates presented
changes in neuronal morphology, low neurite production, and a decreased survival rate
of neurons [177]. Another possible explanation for AGE-induced changes in neuronal
morphology and function is aberrant cross-talk between neurons and their associated glial
cells. Several studies have shown that increased AGE levels induce apoptosis in Schwann
cells, leading to demyelination in associated peripheral nerves [178,179]. Furthermore,
glycation of neurofilament and tubulin may interfere with axonal transport and contribute
to nerve fiber degeneration [180,181].

The AGE accumulation can also impact neuronal function through the activation of
transmembrane bound receptors to advanced glycation end products (RAGEs). Binding of
the AGE to transmembrane bound RAGE has been implicated in the activation of multiple
signaling pathways, including Janus kinase, MAPK, and rho-GTPase [172,173,182,183]. A
significant consequence of activated RAGE signaling is the enhanced production of ROS.
A study of cultured primary DRG neurons reported that activation of RAGE resulted in
increased phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase activity, and the latter facilitated elevated ROS
production, caspase-3 activation, and increased degradation of nuclear DNA [151]. Similar
inductions of ROS accumulation and caspase-3 activation were observed in cultured SH-
SY5Y neuroblastoma cells treated with high glucose [150]. RAGE activation has also been
shown to increase NADPH oxidase activity, resulting in excessive ROS production [184,185].
Elevations in ROS levels produced via either the polyol or AGE pathways have implications
on cardiac autonomic dysfunction as increased oxidative stress has been associated with
diminished cardiac parasympathetic activity in T2DM patients [104,186,187]. While the
direct impact of the AGE on CVP neurons in the ICG have not yet been explored, as com-
munication between CVP neurons and cardiomyocytes is essential for proper cardiac vagal
signaling [54], and ROS have been shown to impact CVP neuronal cell excitability [44,45],
the impact of the AGE-induced changes in cardiac postganglionic parasympathetic nerve
terminals should most certainly be defined.

4.2. Lipotoxicity and Leptin Resistance

As CVP neurons are embedded in epicardial adipose tissue (EAT) [76], the cross-talk
between adipose and neurons in the ICG may play a role in CVP neuronal dysfunction and
ventricular arrhythmogenesis in T2DM. Individuals with T2DM exhibit a higher density
of EAT, which has been linked to the development and progression of CVD [188–191].
Increased EAT thickness has also been associated with an increased risk of developing
ventricular tachycardia [192,193]. Physiologically, EAT functions in lipid storage and energy
homeostasis. It also has the ability to synthesize and release free fatty acids (FFAs) [194].
Under pathological conditions, such as T2DM, EAT-secreted adipokines can induce in-
flammatory cascades (discussed below), and EAT-released excessive FFAs can induce
lipotoxicity, when adipokines/FFAs are taken up by neurons [195–198]. Increased plasma

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

11 of 28

levels of lipid metabolites have been linked with diminished HRV in recently diagnosed
T2DM patients, indicating that increases in circulating lipids may contribute to cardiac
autonomic dysfunction [199]. Lipotoxicity occurs when cells take up excess levels of fatty
acids, which can result in increased levels of lipid peroxidation and induce mitochon-
drial damage [200–202]. Compromised mitochondrial function further results in increased
oxidative stress and potential apoptosis [203–205]. A recent study has shown that HFD-
induced mouse obesity increases intracellular lipid accumulation in the sciatic nerve, and
subsequently induces peripheral neuropathy [206]. Furthermore, peripheral neuropa-
thy in prediabetic Zucker fatty rats has been attributed to FFA-induced oxidative and
nitrosative stress [207,208]. While no direct evidence has yet been presented for the role
of lipotoxicity in the development of CVP neuronal dysfunction, it is certainly possible
that lipotoxicity-induced ROS elevation plays a pathogenic role in the T2DM-induced
cardiovascular parasympathetic withdrawal and ventricular arrhythmogenesis.

Besides its role in FFA regulation, the EAT plays an endocrine role through the regula-
tion and release of adipokines such as leptin, TNF-α, IL-6, and adiponectin [209]. The EAT
are metabolically active tissues that, under the physiological condition, exert cardioprotec-
tive effects through regulating expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, stimulating nitric
oxide production, and reducing oxidative stress [210,211]. Greater levels of cardiac fat
deposits initiate pro-inflammatory signaling, and elevated serum levels of the adipokines
leptin, TNF-α, and omentin correlate with changes in HRV in T2DM patients [211–214].
The adipokine leptin exerts both pro- and anti-inflammatory effects depending on the
tissues being acted on [215–217]. Leptin resistance is a common pathology that develops
in T2DM patients, defined as patients exhibiting a reduced sensitivity to leptin [218]. One
study noted that genetically leptin-resistant db/db mice, a common T2DM model, exhib-
ited reduced HRV and baroreflex sensitivity, indicating reduced cardiac vagal tone [219].
While the exact mechanism by which leptin resistance induces cardiac vagal withdrawal in
T2DM are not yet known, it may be through ROS over-production, as it has been reported
that leptin resistance is associated with elevated ROS accumulation in adipocytes and the
hypothalamus of T2DM mice [220,221].

4.3. Inflammation

The development of cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction in T2DM is multifacto-
rial, with multiple T2DM-associated pathophysiologies, such as insulin resistance, leptin
resistance, lipotoxicity, and excess EAT production, all potentially contributing to the rise
in intracellular ROS and initiating inflammation (Figure 2) [114,222–224]. In a study of
newly diagnosed diabetic patients, decreased HRV was associated with increased circu-
lating levels of pro-inflammatory markers C-reactive protein (CRP) and IL-6 [148]. This
was further supported by Herder et al. who identified that, along with CRP and IL-6,
reduced cardiac vagal tone in T2DM patients was associated with elevated circulation of
IL-18, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1, and soluble E selectin 1 [225]. A primary
source of inflammatory cytokines that affect the heart is the EAT [197]. Recruitment of
macrophages in hypertrophied adipose tissue, such as the EAT, release ROS in response
to elevated cytokine levels [226–228]. Oxidative stress has been reported to activate the
NFκB pathway, which drives the production and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines,
such as IL-6 and TNF-α in the adipose tissues [149,229]. TNF-α-related inflammation
leads to nerve injury, demyelination, and reduces nerve electrical conduction in diabetic
peripheral neuropathies [230]. Diabetes-induced elevation of pro-inflammatory proteins
may result from changes in microRNA (miRNA) expression, as changes in the expres-
sion of miRNAs such as miR-146a, miR-190a-5p, and miR-184-5p have been associated
with the development of peripheral diabetic neuropathies [231]. Similarly, inhibition of
miRNA miR-145-5p results in reduced levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and
IL-6 in cultured high-glucose-treated retinal ganglionic cells [232]. While the impact for
T2DM-induced changes on miRNA expression in CVP neurons has not yet been explored,
defining the role of miRNA regulation of cytokine expression in the ICG is warranted.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

12 of 28

Furthermore, the efferent outflow of the vagus nerve exerts an inhibitory effect on cytokine
release from immune cells [233,234], which supports the amplification of inflammatory
signals in response to cardiovascular parasympathetic withdrawal. Taken together, these
studies provide a strong topic that ROS and cytokine over-production could result in
progressive cardiac parasympathetic withdrawal in T2DM, though this issue has yet to be
definitively determined.

Figure 2. Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms Driving Cardiac Vagal Postganglionic Parasympathetic
Neuronal Dysfunction in T2DM. AGE: Advanced glycation end product, ROS: reactive oxygen
species, CVP: cardiac vagal postganglionic. Figure was created in BioRender.com.

4.4. Vitamin Deficiencies

Several studies have explored the association of vitamin deficiencies and the devel-
opment of cardiac autonomic dysfunction in T2DM patients. Studies of T2DM patients
with 25-hydroxyvitamin D insufficiency reported that patients exhibited reduced cardiac
parasympathetic nerve function as measured by the R-R variation during deep breathing
and reduced HRV [235,236]. Vitamin D deficiency may be a driver for cardiac autonomic
dysfunction, as rats with deprivation of vitamin D present diminished high frequency
power, a reduction in the release of cardiac ACh, and a reduction in cardiac potassium
channel expression [237]. Similarly, a study of 469 T2DM patients found that reduced serum
levels of vitamin B12 were associated with a lower E/I ratio, a measure of parasympathetic
activity [238]. Although molecular mechanisms defining the role of vitamin deficiencies in
T2DM-induced cardiac autonomic dysfunction have not been established, vitamins may
attenuate cardiac vagal dysfunction through ROS scavenging.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464 12 of 27   IL-6 in cultured high-glucose-treated retinal ganglionic cells [232]. While the impact for T2DM-induced changes on miRNA expression in CVP neurons has not yet been explored, defining the role of miRNA regulation of cytokine expression in the ICG is warranted. Furthermore, the efferent outflow of the vagus nerve exerts an inhibitory effect on cyto-kine release from immune cells [233,234], which supports the amplification of inflamma-tory signals in response to cardiovascular parasympathetic withdrawal. Taken together, these studies provide a strong topic that ROS and cytokine over-production could result in progressive cardiac parasympathetic withdrawal in T2DM, though this issue has yet to be definitively determined.  Figure 2. Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms Driving Cardiac Vagal Postganglionic Parasympa-thetic Neuronal Dysfunction in T2DM. AGE: Advanced glycation end product, ROS: reactive oxy-gen species, CVP: cardiac vagal postganglionic. Figure was created in BioRender.com. 4.4. Vitamin Deficiencies Several studies have explored the association of vitamin deficiencies and the devel-opment of cardiac autonomic dysfunction in T2DM patients. Studies of T2DM patients with 25-hydroxyvitamin D insufficiency reported that patients exhibited reduced cardiac parasympathetic nerve function as measured by the R-R variation during deep breathing and reduced HRV [235,236]. Vitamin D deficiency may be a driver for cardiac autonomic dysfunction, as rats with deprivation of vitamin D present diminished high frequency power, a reduction in the release of cardiac ACh, and a reduction in cardiac potassium channel expression [237]. Similarly, a study of 469 T2DM patients found that reduced se-rum levels of vitamin B12 were associated with a lower E/I ratio, a measure of parasym-pathetic activity [238]. Although molecular mechanisms defining the role of vitamin defi-ciencies in T2DM-induced cardiac autonomic dysfunction have not been established, vit-amins may attenuate cardiac vagal dysfunction through ROS scavenging. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

13 of 28

5. Potential Therapeutic Modalities to Treat Parasympathetic Withdrawal and
Ventricular Arrhythmogenesis in T2DM Patients
5.1. Glycemic Control

The gold standard treatment for T2DM patients is the control of blood glucose levels
to prevent hyperglycemia and subsequent oxidative stress and inflammation development.
It has been well established that poor glycemic control is a driver for cardiovascular auto-
nomic dysfunction [186,239–241]. While glycemic control has been shown to be beneficial
in treating many diabetes-associated pathophysiologies, the impact of glycemic control on
treating cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction in T2DM patients has generally been shown
to provide no improvement to autonomic dysfunction [25,242]. According to the Action
to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) trial, T2DM patients exhibiting
autonomic dysfunction had similar mortality rates when both standard and intensive
treatments for glycemic control were followed [25]. Similarly, a study of a cohort of T2DM
patients assigned to high-intensity interval training found improvements in HbA1c levels,
but limited impact on HRV, indicating that despite improvement of blood glucose regula-
tion, autonomic dysfunction was not improved [243]. A study of 30 T2DM patients with
known cardiovascular diseases identified that T2DM patients treated with insulin and/or
sufonylurea experienced high incidences of hypoglycemia, and were more susceptible
to ventricular arrhythmogenesis [244]. Similar results were reported in a meta-analysis
of 60 studies, in which hypoglycemic T2DM patients were found to have significantly
higher risks of arrhythmic occurrence and CVD-induced death [245]. We do note that
one recent study of 39 T2DM patients by Achmad et al. identified a moderately positive
correlation between glycemic control and cardiac autonomic dysfunction, indicating that
glycemic control may provide a slight benefit to T2DM patients experiencing cardiovascular
autonomic dysfunction, though follow up studies with larger sample sizes are needed to
definitely ascertain this conclusion [246]. The ambiguous role that glycemic control plays,
as a treatment for cardiac autonomic dysfunction, may be due to delayed intervention. It
has been reported that cardiac autonomic dysfunction begins early in the progression of
T2DM, sometimes prior to T2DM diagnosis [100,110], and studies on glycemic control are
usually performed on patients with established T2DM. Further studies on glycemic control
in prediabetic or early stage T2DM populations may provide more insight into the potential
benefits of early intervention on reversing cardiac autonomic dysfunction.

5.2. Pharmacological Intervention

There are two strategies for the treatment of autonomic dysfunction in T2DM patients.
One is prevention of the development of dysfunction, and another is the improvement of
autonomic parameters after dysfunction has developed. As the molecular mechanisms
driving cardiac parasympathetic withdrawal in T2DM are diverse (Figure 2), the pharmaco-
logical therapies targeted towards improvement of cardiovascular autonomic function are
varied (Table 1). One of the most common medications given to T2DM patients to control
blood glucose levels is metformin. Ostropolets et al. recently reported that compared to
T2DM patients treated with sulfonylurea, patients treated with metformin experienced
a reduced risk for the development of ventricular arrhythmia, atrial arrhythmia, and
bradycardia [247]. Similar observations were made in population-based cohort studies,
in which T2DM patients in both Hong Kong and the UK treated with sulfonylurea had
a significantly higher risk of ventricular arrhythmia and SCD than patients managed by
metformin [248,249]. The exact molecular mechanism responsible for the potential ther-
apeutic effect of metformin on cardiovascular autonomic function in T2DM has not yet
been determined, but growing evidence suggests that it may be multifactorial, because
metformin exerts both antioxidant [222,250] and anti-inflammatory actions [251,252].

Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors have recently gained attention as a potential
therapeutic for treating T2DM. DPP-4 inhibitors have traditionally been used as a treatment
for diabetes through the inhibition of the enzyme DPP-4, which breaks down incretins, a
hormone that suppresses glucagon levels and promotes insulin production, thus regulating

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

14 of 28

blood glucose levels [98]. In a recent open-label pilot study, 20 T2DM patients treated
with the DPP-4 inhibitor, Teneligliptin, exhibited improvement of cardiac parasympathetic
autonomic function, as measured by the heart rate responding to standing and the heart
rate responding to Valsalva maneuver. In the same study, improvements in parameters for
diabetic peripheral neuropathy were also observed [253]. Considering that DPP-4 inhibitors
have also been shown to have adverse cardiovascular side effects such as sympathetic over-
activation, and the induction of heart failure [254,255], further studies must be performed
to clarify whether long-term treatment with DPP-4 inhibitors in T2DM patients is a viable
therapeutic avenue.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists have also been implicated as a
potential pharmacological therapeutic treatment for T2DM-induced autonomic dysfunc-
tion, though its efficacy has recently been debated. Physiologically, GLP-1 regulates
glucagon/insulin signaling pathways as an incretin hormone [256]. GLP-1 receptor ago-
nists have been shown to impact the heart indirectly through modulation of cardiac neural
circuitry [257,258]. Recently, a study of 27 newly diagnosed T2DM patients reported that
treatment with the GLP-1 receptor agonist liraglutide increased heart rate and reduced
HRV indicating reduced parasympathetic activity [259]. Alternatively, several studies
have reported that GLP-1 receptor agonists have no impact on altering sympathovagal
tone [260,261]. A recent meta-analysis studying GLP-1 receptor agonist and arrhythmo-
genicity in T2DM patients revealed that there was no significant association between the
risk of major arrhythmias and GLP-1 receptor agonist treatment [262]. While GLP-1 re-
ceptor agonists exert positive effects on glycemic control in T2DM patients, they have not
yet been shown to have any therapeutic potential for treating cardiac parasympathetic
withdrawal and ventricular arrhythmogenesis.

Sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors have also been presented as a
potential therapeutic for the treatment of cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction and pre-
vention of cardiac arrhythmogenesis. SGLT2 inhibitors aid in glycemic control through
inhibition of cellular glucose uptake independent of insulin action [263]. A recent study of
42 T2DM patients treated with the SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliflozin reported that dapagliflozin
improved HRV and reduced the frequency of premature ventricular contractions, as com-
pared to T2DM patients treated with other oral antidiabetics (non-SGLT2 inhibitor) [264].
Similarly, Fujiki et al. recently reported that the SGLT2 inhibitor empagliflozin reduced the
number of ventricular arrhythmias in T2DM patients with an implantable cardioverter-
defibrillator [265]. Alternatively, a meta-analysis of 247 T2DM patients from three in-
dependent trials reported that SGLT2 inhibitor treatment did not show any benefit for
diabetes-induced cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction [266]. As such, the impact of
SGLT2 inhibitors as a treatment for T2DM induced cardiac autonomic dysfunction has not
yet been definitively determined.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors have been shown to have some
therapeutic potential to treat cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction in T2DM patients. A
recent study of a cohort of 18 diabetic patients treated with the ACE inhibitor Ramipril
demonstrated improvement in parasympathetic tone as determined by the measurement
of E/I ratio during a deep breathing test [267]. Similar improvements in cardiovascular
parasympathetic tone were found when T2DM patients were treated with the ACE inhibitor
quinapril for two years [268]. Alternatively, Malik et al found that one-year treatment with
the ACE inhibitor trandolapril had no benefit to cardiovascular autonomic function [269].
While the studies presented here indicate ACE inhibition may improve T2DM-induced
cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction, further clinical studies with larger sample sizes are
necessary to definitively assess the therapeutic potential of ACE inhibitors.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

15 of 28

Table 1. Summary of Pharmaceutical Therapies Targeting Cardiovascular Autonomic Dysfunction in T2DM.

Pharmaceutical Class

Metformin

DPP-4 inhibitors

GLP-1 receptor agonists

SGLT2 inhibitors

ACE inhibitors

Antioxidant therapy

Citation

[247–249]

[253]

[254,255]

[259]
[260]
[261]

[262]

[264]

[265]
[266]

[267]

[268]

[269]

[270]
[271]
[272,273]

Treatment

Metformin

Teneligliptin

Meta-analyses including sitagliptin, alogliptin, saxaglipitin,
vidaglipitin, and linaglipitin

Liraglutide
Liraglutide and glimepiride
Meta-analysis including exenatide and liraglutide
Meta-analysis including lixisenatide, liraglutide, semaglutide,
exenatide, albiglutide, dulaglutide, and efpeglenatide

Dapagliflozin

Empagliflozin
Meta-analysis including dapagliflozin and empagliflozin

Rampiril

Quinapril

Trandoapril

Vitamin C
Vitamin E
α-Lipoic acid

Summary of Findings

Decreased incidence of ventricular arrhythmia and SCD

Improved heart rate in response to standing and heart rate in
response to valsalva maneuver

Induced sympathetic activation and heart failure

Increased heart rate and reduced HRV
No change in sympathovagal tone
No change in sympathovagal tone

No impact on arrhythmia development

Improved HRV and reduced frequency of premature
ventricular contractions
Reduced occurrence of ventricular arrhythmia
No changes in cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction

Improved E/I ratio during deep breathing test
Improved E/I ratio and mean circular resultant during deep
breathing test
No changes in cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction

Improved HRV and decreased heart rate
Increased high power components of HRV
No change in HRV

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

16 of 28

5.3. Antioxidant Therapy

As ROS accumulation has been identified as a driver for CVP neuron dysfunction
resulting in the withdrawal of cardiac parasympathetic tone and ventricular arrhythmogen-
esis, antioxidant-based therapies are an essential therapeutic avenue that must be explored.
A study by Fabiyi-Ebor et al. reported that treatment of T2DM rats with the antioxidant vita-
min C inhibited T2DM-induced reduction in HRV, and decreased the heart rate, attenuating
cardiac parasympathetic dysfunction [270]. Similarly, vitamin E administration improved
glycated hemoglobin levels, plasma insulin levels, as well as increased the total and high
frequency power components of HRV in a double-blind study of 50 T2DM patients [271]. It
should be noted that not all antioxidants have been shown to be equally effective. Studies
of the antioxidant α-lipoic acid (ALA) found no significant improvement in cardiovascular
autonomic dysfunction in T2DM patients [272,273] despite one study that found ALA treat-
ment significantly reduced serum levels of the pro-inflammatory proteins, CRP, IL-6, IL-8,
and TNF-α [274]. Benefits of specific antioxidants in T2DM patients may be constricted
by multiple factors such as dosage, metabolic breakdown, and bioavailability. Further
studies are warranted to investigate specific antioxidants and their molecular mechanisms
for protection against ROS production and cardiovascular vagal dysfunction in T2DM.

5.4. Vagal Nerve Stimulation

As cardiac vagal withdrawal is the primary driver of ventricular arrhythmogenesis in
T2DM patients, vagal nerve stimulation (VNS) may have therapeutic potential for T2DM-
induced cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction. Studies of VNS using implanted electrodes
in pigs and canines who experienced MI found that cardiac VNS improved cardiac me-
chanical function and decreased the occurrence of ventricular arrhythmia [34,275,276].
Furthermore, a study of isolated innervated rabbit hearts reported that VNS corrected long
QT-associated arrhythmias induced by increased sympathetic tone [277]. The beneficial
impact of VNS on treating ventricular arrhythmia may be due, in part, to its ability to
inhibit cytokine production. Rats subjected to 30 min of transient cardiac ischemia and
VNS exhibited lower levels of inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α and IL-6. Reductions
in serum TNF-α and IL-6 were also observed in VNS-treated canines experiencing heart
failure [278,279]. Similarly, VNS treatment on obese insulin-resistant rats reduced cardiac
TNF-α levels and oxidative stress [280]. VNS has also been reported to reduce blood glucose
levels in HFD-low-dose STZ T2DM rats [281], and improve nociceptive hypersensitivity (an
indicator of diabetic peripheral neuropathy) in Zucker diabetic rats. While the beneficial
impacts of VNS on cardiac parasympathetic withdrawal in T2DM has yet to be determined,
the restoration of parasympathetic function remains an attractive therapeutic strategy to be
explored.

6. Conclusions

In this review, we update information on the remodeling of cardiac postganglionic
parasympathetic neurons in the ICG during T2DM development and summarized the
impact of withdrawal of cardiac parasympathetic tone on ventricular arrhythmogenesis
in T2DM patients. The evidence presented here supports a complex interrelationship
between oxidative stress and inflammation in the progression of cardiovascular autonomic
dysregulation in T2DM. No current therapy so far has proven to be definitively efficacious
in the treatment of established cardiac parasympathetic dysfunction in T2DM patients.
Future examinations of endogenous signaling pathways leading to oxidative stress and
inflammation in cardiac postganglionic parasympathetic neurons are essential in the ef-
fort to develop targeted therapeutic interventions in the hope of preventing ventricular
arrhythmia and SCD in T2DM patients.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

17 of 28

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.J.E. and Y.-L.L.; resources, Y.-L.L.; writing—original
draft preparation, A.J.E.; writing—review and editing, A.J.E. and Y.-L.L.; visualization, A.J.E.; super-
vision, Y.-L.L.; project administration, Y.-L.L.; funding acquisition, Y.-L.L. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This study was supported by the National Institute of Health’s National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA (R01HL144146 and R01HL168500 to YLL).

Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Abbreviations

Ach: Acetylcholine; CVD: Cardiovascular disease; CVP: Cardiac vagal postganglionic; ICG:
Intracardiac ganglia; ROS: Reactive oxygen species; SCD: Sudden cardiac death; T2DM: Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus; VNS: Vagal nerve stimulation.

References

1.

Zheng, Y.; Ley, S.H.; Hu, F.B. Global aetiology and epidemiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus and its complications. Nat. Rev.
Endocrinol. 2018, 14, 88–98. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

2. Henning, R.J. Type-2 diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease. Future Cardiol. 2018, 14, 491–509. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.

Cannon, A.; Handelsman, Y.; Heile, M.; Shannon, M. Burden of illness in type 2 diabetes mellitus. J. Manag. Care Spec. Pharm.
2018, 24, S5–S13. [CrossRef]

4. Hossain, M.J.; Al-Mamun, M.; Islam, M.R. Diabetes mellitus, the fastest growing global public health concern: Early detection

5.
6.

7.

8.

should be focused. Health Sci. Rep. 2024, 7, e2004. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Guo, H.; Wu, H.; Li, Z. The pathogenesis of diabetes. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 6978. [CrossRef]
Sun, T.; Guo, Y.N.; Su, Y.T.; Shan, S.G.; Qian, W.B.; Zhang, F.X.; Li, M.X.; Zhang, Z.W. Molecular mechanisms of diabetic
nephropathy: A narrative review. Cell Biol. Int. 2024, 48, 1240–1253. [CrossRef]
Tang, Q.; Buonfiglio, F.; Böhm, E.W.; Zhang, L.; Pfeiffer, N.; Korb, C.A.; Gericke, A. Diabetic retinopathy: New treatment
approaches targeting redox and immune mechanisms. Antioxidants 2024, 13, 594. [CrossRef]
Strand, N.; Anderson, M.A.; Attanti, S.; Gill, B.; Wie, C.; Dawodu, A.; Pagan-Rosado, R.; Harbell, M.W.; Maloney, J.A. Diabetic
neuropathy: Pathophysiology review. Curr. Pain. Headache Rep. 2024, 28, 481–487. [CrossRef]

9. Wong, N.D.; Sattar, N. Cardiovascular risk in diabetes mellitus: Epidemiology, assessment and prevention. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 2023,

20, 685–695. [CrossRef]
International Diabetes Federation. IDF Diabetes Atlas; International Diabetes Federation: Brussels, Belgium, 2021.

10.
11. Einarson, T.R.; Acs, A.; Ludwig, C.; Panton, U.H. Prevalence of cardiovascular disease in type 2 diabetes: A systematic literature

12.

13.

review of scientific evidence from across the world in 2007–2017. Cardiovasc. Diabetol. 2018, 17, 83. [CrossRef]
Singh, G.M.; Danaei, G.; Farzadfar, F.; Stevens, G.A. The age-specific quantitative effects of metabolic risk factors on cardiovascular
diseases and diabetes: A pooled analysis. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e65174. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Jouven, X.; Lemaitre, R.N.; Rea, T.D.; Sotoodehnia, N.; Empana, J.P.; Siscovick, D.S. Diabetes, glucose level, and risk of sudden
cardiac death. Eur. Heart J. 2005, 26, 2142–2147. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

14. Tian, X.; Chen, S.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, X.; Xu, Q.; Xia, X.; Wang, P.; Luo, Y.; Wu, S.; Wang, A. Association of cumulative blood
glucose load with cardiovascular risk and all-cause mortality. Diabetes Metab. Syndr. Clin. Res. Rev. 2023, 17, 102900. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

15. Walker, A.M.; Cubbon, R.M. Sudden cardiac death in patients with diabetes mellitus and chronic heart failure. Diabetes Vasc. Dis.

Res. 2015, 12, 228–233. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

16. Mhaimeed, O.; Pillai, K.; Dargham, S.; Al Suwaidi, J.; Jneid, H.; Abi Khalil, C. Type 2 diabetes and in-hospital sudden cardiac

17.

arrest in ST-elevation myocardial infarction in the US. Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 2023, 10, 1175731. [CrossRef]
Singh, K.B.; Nnadozie, M.C.; Abdal, M.; Shrestha, N.; Abe, R.A.M.; Masroor, A.; Khorochkov, A.; Prieto, J.; Mohammed, L. Type 2
diabetes and causes of sudden cardiac death: A systematic review. Cureus 2021, 13, e18145. [CrossRef]

18. Vahatalo, J.H.; Huikuri, H.V.; Holmstrom, L.T.A.; Kentta, T.V.; Haukilahti, M.A.E.; Pakanen, L.; Kaikkonen, K.S.; Tikkanen, J.;
Perkiomaki, J.S.; Myerburg, R.J.; et al. Association of silent myocardial infarction and sudden cardiac death. JAMA Cardiol. 2019,
4, 796–802. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

18 of 28

19. Watanabe, E.; Tanabe, T.; Osaka, M.; Chishaki, A.; Takase, B.; Niwano, S.; Watanabe, I.; Sugi, K.; Katoh, T.; Takayanagi, K.; et al.
Sudden cardiac arrest recorded during Holter monitoring: Prevalence, antecedent electrical events, and outcomes. Heart Rhythm.
2014, 11, 1418–1425. [CrossRef]

20. Deo, R.; Albert, C.M. Epidemiology and genetics of sudden cardiac death. Circulation 2012, 125, 620–637. [CrossRef]
21. Chakraborty, P.; Nattel, S.; Nanthakumar, K.; Connelly, K.A.; Husain, M.; Po, S.S.; Ha, A.C.T. Sudden cardiac death due to

ventricular arrhythmia in diabetes mellitus: A bench to bedside review. Heart Rhythm. 2024, 21, 1827–1837. [CrossRef]

22. Rawshani, A.; McGuire, D.K.; Omerovic, E.; Sattar, N.; McMurray, J.J.V.; Smith, U.; Redfors, B.; Bergfeldt, L.; Eliasson, B.; Boren, J.;
et al. Cardiac arrhythmias and conduction abnormalities in patients with type 2 diabetes. Sci. Rep. 2023, 13, 1192. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Scheen, A.J. Glucose-lowering agents and risk of ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death: A comprehensive review
ranging from sulphonylureas to SGLT2 inhibitors. Diabetes Metab. 2022, 48, 101405. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

23.

24. Reaven, P.D.; Emanuele, N.V.; Wiitala, W.L.; Bahn, G.D.; Reda, D.J.; McCarren, M.; Duckworth, W.C.; Hayward, R.A. Intensive
glucose control in patients with type 2 diabetes—15-year follow-up. N. Engl. J. Med. 2019, 380, 2215–2224. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study Group; Gerstein, H.C.; Miller, M.E.; Byington, R.P.; Goff, D.C., Jr.; Bigger,
J.T.; Buse, J.B.; Cushman, W.C.; Genuth, S.; Ismail-Beigi, F.; et al. Effects of intensive glucose lowering in type 2 diabetes. N. Engl.
J. Med. 2008, 358, 2545–2559. [PubMed]

26. de Moura-Tonello, S.C.; Porta, A.; Marchi, A.; de Almeida, F.A.; Francisco, C.O.; Rehder-Santos, P.; Milan-Mattos, J.C.; Simoes,
R.P.; Gois, M.O.; Catai, A.M. Cardiovascular variability analysis and baroreflex estimation in patients with type 2 diabetes in
absence of any manifest neuropathy. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0148903. [CrossRef]
Shimabukuro, M.; Tanaka, A.; Sata, M.; Dai, K.; Shibata, Y.; Inoue, Y.; Ikenaga, H.; Kishimoto, S.; Ogasawara, K.; Takashima,
A.; et al. alpha-Glucosidase inhibitor miglitol attenuates glucose fluctuation, heart rate variability and sympathetic activity in
patients with type 2 diabetes and acute coronary syndrome: A multicenter randomized controlled (MACS) study. Cardiovasc.
Diabetol. 2017, 16, 86–0571. [CrossRef]

27.

28. Tancredi, M.; Rosengren, A.; Svensson, A.M.; Kosiborod, M.; Pivodic, A.; Gudbjornsdottir, S.; Wedel, H.; Clements, M.; Dahlqvist,

S.; Lind, M. Excess mortality among persons with type 2 diabetes. N. Engl. J. Med. 2015, 373, 1720–1732. [CrossRef]

29. Thaung, H.P.; Baldi, J.C.; Wang, H.Y.; Hughes, G.; Cook, R.F.; Bussey, C.T.; Sheard, P.W.; Bahn, A.; Jones, P.P.; Schwenke, D.O.;
et al. Increased efferent cardiac sympathetic nerve activity and defective intrinsic heart rate regulation in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
2015, 64, 2944–2956. [CrossRef]

30. Ruiz, J.; Monbaron, D.; Parati, G.; Perret, S.; Haesler, E.; Danzeisen, C.; Hayoz, D. Diabetic neuropathy is a more important
determinant of baroreflex sensitivity than carotid elasticity in type 2 diabetes. Hypertension 2005, 46, 162–167. [CrossRef]
Sorski, L.; Gidron, Y. The vagal nerve, inflammation, and diabetes-A holy triangle. Cells 2023, 12, 1632. [CrossRef]

31.
32. Ziegler, D.; Strom, A.; Bonhof, G.; Puttgen, S.; Bodis, K.; Burkart, V.; Mussig, K.; Szendroedi, J.; Markgraf, D.F.; Roden, M.; et al.
Differential associations of lower cardiac vagal tone with insulin resistance and insulin secretion in recently diagnosed type 1 and
type 2 diabetes. Metabolism 2018, 79, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

33. Liao, D.; Cai, J.; Brancati, F.L.; Folsom, A.; Barnes, R.W.; Tyroler, H.A.; Heiss, G. Association of vagal tone with serum insulin,

glucose, and diabetes mellitus; The ARIC Study. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 1995, 30, 211–221. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

34. Hadaya, J.; Dajani, A.H.; Cha, S.; Hanna, P.; Challita, R.; Hoover, D.B.; Ajijola, O.A.; Shivkumar, K.; Ardell, J.L. Vagal nerve
stimulation reduces ventricular arrhythmias and mitigates adverse neural cardiac remodeling post-myocardial infarction. JACC
Basic. Transl. Sci. 2023, 8, 1100–1118. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

35. Kalla, M.; Herring, N.; Paterson, D.J. Cardiac sympatho-vagal balance and ventricular arrhythmia. Auton. Neurosci. 2016, 199,

29–37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

36. Ng, G.A. Vagal modulation of cardiac ventricular arrhythmia. Exp. Physiol. 2014, 99, 295–299. [CrossRef]
37. Vaseghi, M.; Shivkumar, K. The role of the autonomic nervous system in sudden cardiac death. Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis. 2008, 50,

404–419. [CrossRef]

38. Thomas, G.D. Neural control of the circulation. Adv. Physiol. Educ. 2011, 35, 28–32. [CrossRef]
39. Verrier, R.L.; Antzelevitch, C. Autonomic aspects of arrhythmogenesis: The enduring and the new. Curr. Opin. Cardiol. 2004, 19,

2–11. [CrossRef]

40. Duraes Campos, I.; Pinto, V.; Sousa, N.; Pereira, V.H. A brain within the heart: A review on the intracardiac nervous system. J.

Mol. Cell Cardiol. 2018, 119, 1–9. [CrossRef]

41. Dyavanapalli, J. Novel approaches to restore parasympathetic activity to the heart in cardiorespiratory diseases. Am. J. Physiol.

42.

Heart Circ. Physiol. 2020, 319, H1153–H1161. [CrossRef]
Fedele, L.; Brand, T. The intrinsic cardiac nervous system and its role in cardiac pacemaking and conduction. J. Cardiovasc. Dev.
Dis. 2020, 7, 54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

43. Oberhauser, V.; Schwertfeger, E.; Rutz, T.; Beyersdorf, F.; Rump, L.C. Acetylcholine release in human heart atrium. Circulation

2001, 103, 1638–1643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

44. Liu, J.; Tu, H.; Zheng, H.; Zhang, L.; Tran, T.P.; Muelleman, R.L.; Li, Y.L. Alterations of calcium channels and cell excitability in
intracardiac ganglion neurons from type 2 diabetic rats. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 2012, 302, C1119–C1127. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

19 of 28

45. Hu, W.; Zhang, D.; Tu, H.; Li, Y.L. Reduced cell excitability of cardiac postganglionic parasympathetic neurons correlates
with myocardial infarction-induced fatal ventricular arrhythmias in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Front. Neurosci. 2021, 15, 721364.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

46. Liu, J.; Zhang, D.; Tu, H.; Muelleman, R.L.; Wang, W.Z.; Li, Y.L. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and cardiac vagal activity in rats

with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Metab. 2015, S13, 012.

47. Machhada, A.; Ang, R.; Ackland, G.L.; Ninkina, N.; Buchman, V.L.; Lythgoe, M.F.; Trapp, S.; Tinker, A.; Marina, N.; Gourine, A.V.
Control of ventricular excitability by neurons of the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve. Heart Rhythm. 2015, 12, 2285–2293.
[CrossRef]

48. Batulevicius, D.; Frese, T.; Peschke, E.; Pauza, D.H.; Batuleviciene, V. Remodeling of the intracardiac ganglia in diabetic

Goto-Kakizaki rats: An anatomical study. Cardiovasc. Diabetol. 2013, 12, 85.

49. Gordan, R.; Gwathmey, J.K.; Xie, L.H. Autonomic and endocrine control of cardiovascular function. World J. Cardiol. 2015, 7,

204–214. [CrossRef]

50. Robinson, B.F.; Epstein, S.E.; Beiser, G.D.; Braunwald, E. Control of heart rate by the autonomic nervous system. Circ. Res. 1966,

19, 400–411. [CrossRef]

51. Khan, A.A.; Lip, G.Y.H.; Shantsila, A. Heart rate variability in atrial fibrillation: The balance between sympathetic and parasym-

pathetic nervous system. Eur. J. Clin. Investig. 2019, 49, e13174. [CrossRef]

52. Gorky, J.; Schwaber, J. Conceptualization of a parasympathetic endocrine system. Front. Neurosci. 2019, 13, 1008. [CrossRef]

53.

[PubMed]
Fisher, J.P.; Zera, T.; Paton, J.F.R. Chapter 10—Respiratory–cardiovascular interactions. In Handbook of Clinical Neurology; Chen, R.,
Guyenet, P.G., Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2022; pp. 279–308.

54. Giannino, G.; Braia, V.; Griffith Brookles, C.; Giacobbe, F.; D’Ascenzo, F.; Angelini, F.; Saglietto, A.; De Ferrari, G.M.; Dusi, V. The
intrinsic cardiac nervous system: From pathophysiology to therapeutic implications. Biology 2024, 13, 105. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Kawashima, T. The autonomic nervous system of the human heart with special reference to its origin, course, and peripheral

distribution. Anat. Embryol. 2005, 209, 425–438. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

56. Armour, J.A.; Murphy, D.A.; Yuan, B.-X.; MacDonald, S.; Hopkins, D.A. Gross and microscopic anatomy of the human intrinsic

cardiac nervous system. Anat. Rec. 1997, 247, 289–298. [CrossRef]

57. Aksu, T.; Gupta, D.; Pauza, D.H. Anatomy and physiology of intrinsic cardiac autonomic nervous system: Da vinci anatomy card

#2. JACC Case Rep. 2021, 3, 625–629.

58. Armour, J.A. Intrinsic cardiac neurons. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 1991, 2, 331–341. [CrossRef]
59. Tompkins, J.D.; Hoover, D.B.; Havton, L.A.; Patel, J.C.; Cho, Y.; Smith, E.H.; Biscola, N.P.; Ajijola, O.A.; Shivkumar, K.; Ardell, J.L.

60.

Comparative specialization of intrinsic cardiac neurons in humans, mice, and pigs. bioRxiv 2024. [CrossRef]
Singh, S.; Johnson, P.I.; Lee, R.E.; Orfei, E.; Lonchyna, V.A.; Sullivan, H.J.; Montoya, A.; Tran, H.; Wehrmacher, W.H.; Wurster, R.D.
Topography of cardiac ganglia in the adult human heart. J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg. 1996, 112, 943–953.

61. Richardson, R.J.; Grkovic, I.; Anderson, C.R. Immunohistochemical analysis of intracardiac ganglia of the rat heart. Cell Tissue Res.

2003, 314, 337–350. [CrossRef]

62. Lizot, G.; Pasqualin, C.; Tissot, A.; Pagès, S.; Faivre, J.-F.; Chatelier, A. Molecular and functional characterization of the mouse

63.

intrinsic cardiac nervous system. Heart Rhythm. 2022, 19, 1352–1362. [CrossRef]
Sampaio, K.N.; Mauad, H.; Spyer, K.M.; Ford, T.W. Differential chronotropic and dromotropic responses to focal stimulation of
cardiac vagal ganglia in the rat. Exp. Physiol. 2003, 88, 315–327. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

64. Achanta, S.; Gorky, J.; Leung, C.; Moss, A.; Robbins, S.; Eisenman, L.; Chen, J.; Tappan, S.; Heal, M.; Farahani, N.; et al. A
comprehensive integrated anatomical and molecular atlas of rat intrinsic cardiac nervous system. iScience 2020, 23, 101140.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

65. Vaitkevicius, R.; Saburkina, I.; Rysevaite, K.; Vaitkeviciene, I.; Pauziene, N.; Zaliunas, R.; Schauerte, P.; Jalife, J.; Pauza, D.H. Nerve

supply of the human pulmonary veins: An anatomical study. Heart Rhythm. 2009, 6, 221–228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

66. Pauza, D.H.; Skripka, V.; Pauziene, N.; Stropus, R. Morphology, distribution, and variability of the epicardiac neural ganglionated

subplexuses in the human heart. Anat. Rec. 2000, 259, 353–382. [CrossRef]

67. Hanna, P.; Dacey, M.J.; Brennan, J.; Moss, A.; Robbins, S.; Achanta, S.; Biscola, N.P.; Swid, M.A.; Rajendran, P.S.; Mori, S.; et al.
Innervation and neuronal control of the mammalian sinoatrial node a comprehensive atlas. Circ. Res. 2021, 128, 1279–1296.
[CrossRef]

68. Bell, C. Chapter 46—Regulation of metabolism by the autonomic nervous system. In Primer on the Autonomic Nervous System, 4th
ed.; Biaggioni, I., Browning, K., Fink, G., Jordan, J., Low, P.A., Paton, J.F.R., Eds.; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2023; pp.
263–266.

69. Apelt-Glitz, K.; Alken, F.-A.; Jungen, C.; Scherschel, K.; Klöcker, N.; Meyer, C. Respiratory and heart rate dynamics during
peripheral chemoreceptor deactivation compared to targeted sympathetic and sympathetic/parasympathetic (co-)activation.
Auton. Neurosci. 2022, 241, 103009. [CrossRef]

70. Elia, A.; Fossati, S. Autonomic nervous system and cardiac neuro-signaling pathway modulation in cardiovascular disorders and

Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Physiol. 2023, 14, 1060666. [CrossRef]

71. Tanaka, K.; Chiba, T. The vagal origin of preganglionic fibers containing nitric oxide synthase in the guinea-pig heart. Neurosci.

Lett. 1998, 252, 135–138. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

20 of 28

72.

Sato, A.; Kojima, F.; Hayashi, T.; Arichi, S.; Maruo, Y.; Ishibashi, H.; Eto, K. The KCNQ channel inhibitor XE991 suppresses
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor-mediated responses in rat intracardiac ganglion neurons. Pharmacol. Rep. 2022, 74, 1–7. [CrossRef]
73. Zhang, D.; Tu, H.; Hu, W.; Duan, B.; Zimmerman, M.C.; Li, Y.L. Hydrogen peroxide scavenging restores N-type calcium channels
in cardiac vagal postganglionic neurons and mitigates myocardial infarction-evoked ventricular arrhythmias in type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 2022, 9, 871852. [CrossRef]

74. Verkerk, A.O.; Remme, C.A.; Schumacher, C.A.; Scicluna, B.P.; Wolswinkel, R.; de Jonge, B.; Bezzina, C.R.; Veldkamp, M.W.

Functional NaV1.8 channels in intracardiac neurons. Circ. Res. 2012, 111, 333–343. [CrossRef]

75. Xu, Z.J.; Adams, D.J. Resting membrane potential and potassium currents in cultured parasympathetic neurones from rat

intracardiac ganglia. J. Physiol. 1992, 456, 405–424. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

76. Armour, J.A. Potential clinical relevance of the ‘little brain’ on the mammalian heart. Exp. Physiol. 2008, 93, 165–176. [CrossRef]

[PubMed]

77. Armour, J.A. The little brain on the heart. Cleve Clin. J. Med. 2007, 74, S48–S51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78. Hoard, J.L.; Hoover, D.B.; Mabe, A.M.; Blakely, R.D.; Feng, N.; Paolocci, N. Cholinergic neurons of mouse intrinsic cardiac ganglia
contain noradrenergic enzymes, norepinephrine transporters, and the neurotrophin receptors tropomyosin-related kinase A and
p75. Neuroscience 2008, 156, 129–142. [CrossRef]

79. Tomas, R.; Kristina, R.-K.; Neringa, P.; Hermanas, I.; Dainius, P.H. Intrinsic cardiac neurons of the adult pigs: Chemical types,
abundance, parameters and distribution within ganglionated plexus. Ann. Anat. Anat. Anz. 2022, 243, 151935. [CrossRef]
80. Horackova, M.; Croll, R.P.; Hopkins, D.A.; Losier, A.M.; Armour, J.A. Morphological and immunohistochemical properties of
primary long-term cultures of adult guinea-pig ventricular cardiomyocytes with peripheral cardiac neurons. Tissue Cell 1996, 28,
411–425. [CrossRef]

81. Brown, D.A. Acetylcholine and cholinergic receptors. Brain Neurosci. Adv. 2019, 3, 2398212818820506. [CrossRef]
82. Peralta, E.G.; Ashkenazi, A.; Winslow, J.W.; Smith, D.H.; Ramachandran, J.; Capon, D.J. Distinct primary structures, ligand-
binding properties and tissue-specific expression of four human muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. EMBO J. 1987, 6, 3923–3929.
[CrossRef]

83. Brann, M.R.; Ellis, J.; Jørgensen, H.; Hill-Eubanks, D.; Jones, S.V.P. Chapter 12: Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes:
Localization and structure/function. In Progress in Brain Research; Cuello, A.C., Ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1993;
pp. 121–127.

84. Wang, H.; Han, H.; Zhang, L.; Shi, H.; Schram, G.; Nattel, S.; Wang, Z. Expression of multiple subtypes of muscarinic receptors

and cellular distribution in the human heart. Mol. Pharmacol. 2001, 59, 1029. [CrossRef]

85. Olshansky, B.; Sabbah, H.N.; Hauptman, P.J.; Colucci, W.S. Parasympathetic nervous system and heart failure. Circulation 2008,

118, 863–871. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

86. Harvey, R.D.; Belevych, A.E. Muscarinic regulation of cardiac ion channels. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2003, 139, 1074–1084. [CrossRef]

[PubMed]

87. Moss, R.; Sachse, F.B.; Moreno-Galindo, E.G.; Navarro-Polanco, R.A.; Tristani-Firouzi, M.; Seemann, G. Modeling effects of voltage
dependent properties of the cardiac muscarinic receptor on human sinus node function. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2018, 14, e1006438.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

88. Bidaud, I.; Chong, A.C.Y.; Carcouet, A.; Waard, S.D.; Charpentier, F.; Ronjat, M.; Waard, M.D.; Isbrandt, D.; Wickman, K.; Vincent,
A.; et al. Inhibition of G protein-gated K+ channels by tertiapin-Q rescues sinus node dysfunction and atrioventricular conduction
in mouse models of primary bradycardia. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 9835. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

89. Borst, M.M.; Szalai, P.; Herzog, N.; Kübler, W.; Strasser, R.H. Transregulation of adenylyl-cyclase-coupled inhibitory receptors in
heart failure enhances anti-adrenergic effects on adult rat cardiomyocytes. Cardiovasc. Res. 1999, 44, 113–120. [CrossRef]

90. Wei, J.W.; Wang, M.C. Muscarinic M2 receptors coupled to inhibition of adenylate cyclase in rat heart. Chin. J. Physiol. 1990, 33,

315–327.

91. Ashton, J.L.; Prince, B.; Sands, G.; Argent, L.; Anderson, M.; Smith, J.E.G.; Tedoldi, A.; Ahmad, A.; Baddeley, D.; Pereira, A.G.;
et al. Electrophysiology and 3D-imaging reveal properties of human intracardiac neurons and increased excitability with atrial
fibrillation. J. Physiol. 2024. [CrossRef]
van Weperen, V.Y.H.; Vos, M.A.; Ajijola, O.A. Autonomic modulation of ventricular electrical activity: Recent developments and
clinical implications. Clin. Auton. Res. 2021, 31, 659–676. [CrossRef]

92.

93. Rajendran, P.S.; Nakamura, K.; Ajijola, O.A.; Vaseghi, M.; Armour, J.A.; Ardell, J.L.; Shivkumar, K. Myocardial infarction induces

structural and functional remodeling of the intrinsic cardiac nervous system. J. Physiol. 2016, 594, 321–341. [CrossRef]

94. Zoppini, G.; Cacciatori, V.; Raimondo, D.; Gemma, M.; Trombetta, M.; Dauriz, M.; Brangani, C.; Pichiri, I.; Negri, C.; Stoico, V.;
et al. Prevalence of cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in a cohort of patients with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes: The
verona newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes study (VNDS). Diabetes Care 2015, 38, 1487–1493. [CrossRef]

95. Tahrani, A.A.; Dubb, K.; Raymond, N.T.; Begum, S.; Altaf, Q.A.; Sadiqi, H.; Piya, M.K.; Stevens, M.J. Cardiac autonomic
neuropathy predicts renal function decline in patients with type 2 diabetes: A cohort study. Diabetologia 2014, 57, 1249–1256.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

96. Zhu, C.; Hanna, P.; Rajendran, P.S.; Shivkumar, K. Neuromodulation for ventricular tachycardia and atrial fibrillation: A clinical

scenario-based review. JACC Clin. Electrophysiol. 2019, 5, 881–896. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

21 of 28

97.

Jungen, C.; Scherschel, K.; Flenner, F.; Jee, H.; Rajendran, P.; De Jong, K.A.; Nikolaev, V.; Meyer, C.; Ardell, J.L.; Tompkins, J.D.
Increased arrhythmia susceptibility in type 2 diabetic mice related to dysregulation of ventricular sympathetic innervation. Am. J.
Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 2019, 317, H1328–H1341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

98. Grisanti, L.A. Diabetes and arrhythmias: Pathophysiology, mechanisms and therapeutic outcomes. Front. Physiol. 2018, 9, 1669.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

99. Kumari, K.P.; Neeraja, M.; Kumar, S.C.; Farha, N.; Vijitha, P. Cardiovascular parasympathetic changes in type-II diabetic mellitus.

Int. J. Integr. Med. Sci. 2016, 3, 374–383. [CrossRef]

100. Hadad, R.; Akobe, S.F.; Weber, P.; Madsen, C.V.; Larsen, B.S.; Madsbad, S.; Nielsen, O.W.; Dominguez, M.H.; Haugaard, S.B.;
Sajadieh, A. Parasympathetic tonus in type 2 diabetes and pre-diabetes and its clinical implications. Sci. Rep. 2022, 12, 18020.
[CrossRef]

101. Rasmussen, T.; Finnerup, N.B.; Singer, W.; Jensen, T.S.; Hansen, J.; Terkelsen, A.J. Preferential impairment of parasymathetic

autonomic function in type 2 diabetes. Auton. Neurosci. 2022, 243, 103026. [CrossRef]

102. Spallone, V. Update on the impact, diagnosis and management of cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in diabetes: What Iis

defined, what is new, and what is unmet. Diabetes Metab. J. 2019, 43, 3–30. [CrossRef]

103. Serhiyenko, V.A.; Serhiyenko, A.A. Cardiac autonomic neuropathy: Risk factors, diagnosis and treatment. World J. Diabetes 2018,

9, 1–24. [CrossRef]

104. Sudo, S.Z.; Montagnoli, T.L.; Rocha, B.S.; Santos, A.D.; de Sa, M.P.L.; Zapata-Sudo, G. Diabetes-induced cardiac autonomic

neuropathy: Impact on heart function and prognosis. Biomedicines 2022, 10, 3258. [CrossRef]

105. Julu, P. Vagolytic effect of diabetes mellitus. Brain 1993, 116, 485–492. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Verrotti, A.; Prezioso, G.; Scattoni, R.; Chiarelli, F. Autonomic neuropathy in diabetes mellitus. Front. Endocrinol. 2014, 5, 205.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

107. Kanagala, A.; Harsoda, J.M. Sympathetic overactivity and parasympathetic impairment in type 2 diabetes: An analysis of

cardiovascular autonomic functions. Cureus 2024, 16, e59561. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

108. Ziegler, D.; Strom, A.; Kupriyanova, Y.; Bierwagen, A.; Bonhof, G.J.; Bodis, K.; Mussig, K.; Szendroedi, J.; Bobrov, P.; Markgraf,
D.F.; et al. Association of lower cardiovagal tone and baroreflex sensitivity with higher liver fat content early in type 2 diabetes. J.
Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2018, 103, 1130–1138. [CrossRef]

109. Benichou, T.; Pereira, B.; Mermillod, M.; Tauveron, I.; Pfabigan, D.; Maqdasy, S.; Dutheil, F. Heart rate variability in type 2 diabetes

mellitus: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0195166. [CrossRef]

110. John, A.P.P.; Udupa, K.; Avangapur, S.; Sujan, M.U.; Inbaraj, G.; Vasuki, P.P.; Mahadevan, A.; Anilkumar, R.; Shekar, M.A.;
Sathyaprabha, T.N. Cardiac autonomic dysfunctions in type 2 diabetes mellitus: An investigative study with heart rate variability
measures. Am. J. Cardiovasc. Dis. 2022, 12, 224–232.

111. Tu, H.; Zhang, D.; Li, Y.L. Cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying arterial baroreceptor remodeling in cardiovascular

diseases and diabetes. Neurosci. Bull. 2019, 35, 98–112. [CrossRef]

112. Ai, J.; Epstein, P.N.; Gozal, D.; Yang, B.; Wurster, R.; Cheng, Z.J. Morphology and topography of nucleus ambiguus projections to

cardiac ganglia in rats and mice. Neuroscience 2007, 149, 845–860. [CrossRef]

113. Cheng, Z.; Zhang, H.; Yu, J.; Wurster, R.D.; Gozal, D. Attenuation of baroreflex sensitivity after domoic acid lesion of the nucleus

ambiguus of rats. J. Appl. Physiol. 2003, 96, 1137–1145. [CrossRef]

114. Bakkar, N.Z.; Mougharbil, N.; Mroueh, A.; Kaplan, A.; Eid, A.H.; Fares, S.; Zouein, F.A.; El-Yazbi, A.F. Worsening baroreflex
sensitivity on progression to type 2 diabetes: Localized vs. systemic inflammation and role of antidiabetic therapy. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 2020, 319, E835–E851. [CrossRef]

115. Sailaja, A.N.; Nanda, N.; Suryanarayana, B.S.; Pal, G.K. Hypertension attenuates the link of osteoprotegerin to reduced baroreflex
sensitivity in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients on oral antidiabetic and antihypertensive therapy—A cross sectional study. BMC
Endocr. Disord. 2022, 22, 226. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

116. Sanya, E.O.; Brown, C.M.; Dutsch, M.; Zikeli, U.; Neundorfer, B.; Hilz, M.J. Impaired cardiovagal and vasomotor responses to

baroreceptor stimulation in type II diabetes mellitus. Eur. J. Clin. Investig. 2003, 33, 582–588. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

117. Kaufmann, D.; Raczak, G.; Szwoch, M.; Wabich, E.; ´Swi ˛atczak, M.; Daniłowicz-Szymanowicz, L. Baroreflex sensitivity but not
microvolt T-wave alternans can predict major adverse cardiac events in ischemic heart failure. Cardiol. J. 2022, 29, 1004–1012.
[CrossRef]

118. Garcia, R.; Degand, B.; Fraty, M.; Le Marcis, V.; Bidegain, N.; Laude, D.; Tavernier, M.; Le Gal, F.; Hadjadj, S.; Saulnier, P.-J.; et al.
Baroreflex sensitivity assessed with the sequence method is associated with ventricular arrhythmias in patients implanted with a
defibrillator for the primary prevention of sudden cardiac death. Arch. Cardiovasc. Dis. 2019, 112, 270–277. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
119. Luna, R.; Talanki Manjunatha, R.; Bollu, B.; Jhaveri, S.; Avanthika, C.; Reddy, N.; Saha, T.; Gandhi, F. A comprehensive review of

neuronal changes in diabetics. Cureus 2021, 13, e19142. [CrossRef]

120. Lund, D.D.; Subieta, A.R.; Pardini, B.J.; Chang, K.S. Alterations in cardiac parasympathetic indices in STZ-induced diabetic rats.

Diabetes 1992, 41, 160–166. [CrossRef]

121. Kamal, A.A.J.; Tay, S.S.W.; Wong, W.C. The cardiac ganglia in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Arch. Histol. Cytol. 1991, 54,

41–49. [CrossRef]

122. Tsujimura, T.; Nunotani, H.; Fushimi, H.; Inoue, T. Morphological changes in autonomic ganglionic cells of the heart in diabetic

patients. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 1986, 2, 133–137. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

22 of 28

123. Jungen, C.; Scherschel, K.; Eickholt, C.; Kuklik, P.; Klatt, N.; Bork, N.; Salzbrunn, T.; Alken, F.; Angendohr, S.; Klene, C.; et al.
Disruption of cardiac cholinergic neurons enhances susceptibility to ventricular arrhythmias. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 14155.
[CrossRef]

124. Xu, Z.J.; Adams, D.J. Voltage-dependent sodium and calcium currents in cultured parasympathetic neurones from rat intracardiac

ganglia. J. Physiol. 1992, 456, 425–441. [CrossRef]

125. Dolphin, A.C. Voltage-gated calcium channels and their auxiliary subunits: Physiology and pathophysiology and pharmacology.

J. Physiol. 2016, 594, 5369–5390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

126. Li, Y.F.; LaCroix, C.; Freeling, J. Specific subtypes of nicotinic cholinergic receptors involved in sympathetic and parasympathetic

cardiovascular responses. Neurosci. Lett. 2009, 462, 20–23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

127. Wang, N.; Orr-Urtreger, A.; Korczyn, A.D. The role of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits in autonomic ganglia:

Lessons from knockout mice. Progress. Neurobiol. 2002, 68, 341–360. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

128. Deng, J.; Jiang, H. Role of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in cardiovascular physiology and pathophysiology: Current trends

and perspectives. Curr. Vasc. Pharmacol. 2021, 19, 370–378. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

129. Koster, J.C.; Permutt, M.A.; Nichols, C.G. Diabetes and insulin secretion: The ATP-sensitive K+ channel (KATP) connection.

Diabetes 2005, 54, 3065–3072. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

130. Stakenborg, N.; Gomez-Pinilla, P.J.; Verlinden, T.J.M.; Wolthuis, A.M.; D’Hoore, A.; Farré, R.; Herijgers, P.; Matteoli, G.;
Boeckxstaens, G.E. Comparison between the cervical and abdominal vagus nerves in mice, pigs, and humans. Neurogastroenterol.
Motil. 2020, 32, e13889. [CrossRef]

131. Tomankova, H.; Valuskova, P.; Varejkova, E.; Rotkova, J.; Benes, J.; Myslivecek, J. The M2 muscarinic receptors are essential for

signaling in the heart left ventricle during restraint stress in mice. Stress 2015, 18, 208–220. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

132. LaCroix, C.; Freeling, J.; Giles, A.; Wess, J.; Li, Y.F. Deficiency of M2 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors increases susceptibility of
ventricular function to chronic adrenergic stress. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 2008, 294, H810–H820. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Evans, A.; Tu, H.; Whitney, L.; Carpenter, K.; Li, Y.L. Correlation of leptin resistance with attenuation of cardiac vagal activation

in type 2 diabetes. Circulation 2024, 135, AMo135. [CrossRef]

134. Lee, L.M.; Chang, C.K.; Cheng, K.C.; Kou, D.H.; Liu, I.M.; Cheng, J.T. Increase of cardiac M2-muscarinic receptor gene expression

in type-1 but not in type-2 diabetic rats. Neurosci. Lett. 2008, 441, 201–204. [CrossRef]

135. Gallego, M.; Zayas-Arrabal, J.; Alquiza, A.; Apellaniz, B.; Casis, O. Electrical features of the diabetic myocardium. Arrhythmic

and cardiovascular safety considerations in diabetes. Front. Pharmacol. 2021, 12, 687256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

136. Liu, Y.; Peng, Y.; Jin, J.; Chen, Y.; Chen, C.; Chen, Z.; Huang, H.; Xu, L. Insulin resistance is independently associated with

cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in type 2 diabetes. J. Diabetes Investig. 2021, 12, 1651–1662. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

137. Tomas, E.; Lin, Y.S.; Dagher, Z.; Saha, A.; Luo, Z.; Ido, Y.; Ruderman, N.B. Hyperglycemia and insulin resistance: Possible

mechanisms. Ann. N. Y Acad. Sci. 2002, 967, 43–51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

138. Stringer, D.M.; Zahradka, P.; Taylor, C.G. Glucose transporters: Cellular links to hyperglycemia in insulin resistance and diabetes.

Nutr. Rev. 2015, 73, 140–154. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

139. Mergenthaler, P.; Lindauer, U.; Dienel, G.A.; Meisel, A. Sugar for the brain: The role of glucose in physiological and pathological

brain function. Trends Neurosci. 2013, 36, 587–597. [CrossRef]

140. Tomlinson, D.R.; Gardiner, N.J. Glucose neurotoxicity. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2008, 9, 36–45. [CrossRef]
141. Giaccari, A.; Sorice, G.; Muscogiuri, G. Glucose toxicity: The leading actor in the pathogenesis and clinical history of type 2

diabetes—Mechanisms and potentials for treatment. Nutr. Metab. Cardiovasc. Dis. 2009, 19, 365–377. [CrossRef]

142. Oates, P.J. Polyol pathway and diabetic peripheral neuropathy. In International Review of Neurobiology; Academic Press: Cambridge,

MA, USA, 2002; pp. 325–392.

143. Whyte, K.A.; Hogg, R.C.; Dyavanapalli, J.; Harper, A.A.; Adams, D.J. Reactive oxygen species modulate neuronal excitability in

rat intrinsic cardiac ganglia. Auton. Neurosci. 2009, 150, 45–52. [CrossRef]

144. Uehara, K.; Yamagishi, S.I.; Otsuki, S.; Chin, S.; Yagihashi, S. Effects of polyol pathway hyperactivity on protein kinase C activity,
nociceptive peptide expression, and neuronal structure in dorsal root ganglia in diabetic mice. Diabetes 2004, 53, 3239–3247.
[CrossRef]

145. Hegab, Z.; Gibbons, S.; Neyses, L.; Mamas, M.A. Role of advanced glycation end products in cardiovascular disease. World J.

Cardiol. 2012, 4, 90–102. [CrossRef]

146. Chang, G.J.; Yeh, Y.H.; Chen, W.J.; Ko, Y.S.; Pang, J.S.; Lee, H.Y. Inhibition of advanced glycation end products formation
attenuates cardiac electrical and mechanical remodeling and vulnerability to tachyarrhythmias in diabetic rats. J. Pharmacol. Exp.
Ther. 2019, 368, 66–78. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

147. Ozturk, G.; Sekeroglu, M.R.; Erdogan, E.; Ozturk, M. The effect of non-enzymatic glycation of extracellular matrix proteins on

axonal regeneration in vitro. Acta Neuropathol. 2006, 112, 627–632. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

148. Vinik, A.I.; Erbas, T.; Casellini, C.M. Diabetic cardiac autonomic neuropathy, inflammation and cardiovascular disease. J. Diabetes

Investig. 2013, 4, 4–18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

149. Ye, J. Emerging role of adipose tissue hypoxia in obesity and insulin resistance. Int. J. Obes. 2009, 33, 54–66. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
150. Cellek, S.; Qu, W.; Schmidt, A.M.; Moncada, S. Synergistic action of advanced glycation end products and endogenous nitric
oxide leads to neuronal apoptosis in vitro: A new insight into selective nitrergic neuropathy in diabetes. Diabetologia 2004, 47,
331–339. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

23 of 28

151. Vincent, A.M.; Perrone, L.; Sullivan, K.A.; Backus, C.; Sastry, A.M.; Lastoskie, C.; Feldman, E.L. Receptor for advanced glycation
end products activation injures primary sensory neurons via oxidative stress. Endocrinology 2007, 148, 548–558. [CrossRef]

152. Garg, S.S.; Gupta, J. Polyol pathway and redox balance in diabetes. Pharmacol. Res. 2022, 182, 106326. [CrossRef]
153. Kaur, N. Diabetic autonomic neuropathy: Pathogenesis to pharmacological management. J. Diabetes Metab. 2014, 5, 7. [CrossRef]
154. Gabbay, K.H. The sorbitol pathway and the complications of diabetes. N. Engl. J. Med. 1973, 288, 831–836.
155. Gugliucci, A. Formation of fructose-mediated advanced glycation end products and their roles in metabolic and inflammatory

diseases. Adv. Nutr. 2017, 8, 54–62. [CrossRef]

156. Maekawa, K.; Tanimoto, T.; Okada, S.; Suzuki, T.; Suzuki, T.; Yabe-Nishimura, C. Expression of aldose reductase and sorbitol
dehydrogenase genes in Schwann cells isolated from rat: Effects of high glucose and osmotic stress. Mol. Brain Res. 2001, 87,
251–256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

157. Tang, W.H.; Martin, K.A.; Hwa, J. Aldose reductase, oxidative stress, and diabetic mellitus. Front. Pharmacol. 2012, 3, 87.

[CrossRef]

158. Antonetti, D.A.; Silva, P.S.; Stitt, A.W. Current understanding of the molecular and cellular pathology of diabetic retinopathy. Nat.

Rev. Endocrinol. 2021, 17, 195–206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

159. Natesan, V.; Kim, S.J. Diabetic nephropathy—A review of risk factors, progression, mechanism, and dietary management. Biomol.

Ther. 2021, 29, 365–372. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

160. Albers, J.W.; Pop-Busui, R. Diabetic neuropathy: Mechanisms, emerging treatments, and subtypes. Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep.

2014, 14, 473. [CrossRef]

161. Feldman, E.L.; Callaghan, B.C.; Pop-Busui, R.; Zochodne, D.W.; Wright, D.E.; Bennett, D.L.; Bril, V.; Russell, J.W.; Viswanathan, V.

Diabetic neuropathy. Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers 2019, 5, 41. [CrossRef]

162. Obrosova, I.G.; Van Huysen, C.; Fathallah, L.; Cao, X.C.; Greene, D.A.; Stevens, M.J. An aldose reductase inhibitor reverses
early diabetes-induced changes in peripheral nerve function, metabolism, and antioxidative defense. FASEB J. 2002, 16, 123–125.
[CrossRef]

163. Li, Q.R.; Wang, Z.; Zhou, W.; Fan, S.R.; Ma, R.; Xue, L.; Yang, L.; Li, Y.S.; Tan, H.L.; Shao, Q.H.; et al. Epalrestat protects against
diabetic peripheral neuropathy by alleviating oxidative stress and inhibiting polyol pathway. Neural Regen. Res. 2016, 11, 345–351.
164. Cameron, N.E.; Cotter, M.A.; Maxfield, E.K. Anti-oxidant treatment prevents the development of peripheral nerve dysfunction in

streptozotocin-diabetic rats. Diabetologia 1993, 36, 299–304. [CrossRef]

165. Campanucci, V.; Krishnaswamy, A.; Cooper, E. Diabetes depresses synaptic transmission in sympathetic ganglia by inactivating

nAChRs through a conserved intracellular cysteine residue. Neuron 2010, 66, 827–834. [CrossRef]

166. Zhang, D.; Hu, W.; Tu, H.; Wadman, M.; Li, Y.L. H2O2-REST signaling pathway is involved in cardiac vagal dysfunction and

myocardial infarction-evoked ventricular arrhythmia in type 2 diabetes. Physiology 2023, 38, 5727640. [CrossRef]

167. Singh, V.P.; Bali, A.; Singh, N.; Jaggi, A.S. Advanced glycation end products and diabetic complications. Korean J. Physiol.

Pharmacol. 2014, 18, 1–14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

168. Del Turco, S.; Basta, G. An update on advanced glycation endproducts and atherosclerosis. Biofactors 2012, 38, 266–274. [CrossRef]
169. Popescu, S.; Timar, B.; Baderca, F.; Simu, M.; Diaconu, L.; Velea, I.; Timar, R. Age as an independent factor for the development of

neuropathy in diabetic patients. Clin. Interv. Aging 2016, 11, 313–318. [PubMed]

170. Papachristou, S.; Pafili, K.; Trypsianis, G.; Papazoglou, D.; Vadikolias, K.; Papanas, N. Skin advanced glycation end products as a

screening tool of neuropathy in type 2 diabetes mellitus. J. Diabetes Complicat. 2022, 36, 108356. [CrossRef]

171. Meerwaldt, R.; Links, T.P.; Graaff, R.; Hoogenberg, K.; Lefrandt, J.D.; Baynes, J.W.; Gans, R.O.; Smit, A.J. Increased accumulation
of skin advanced glycation end-products precedes and correlates with clinical manifestation of diabetic neuropathy. Diabetologia
2005, 48, 1637–1644. [CrossRef]

172. Tanikawa, T.; Okada, Y.; Tanikawa, R.; Tanaka, Y. Advanced glycation end products induce calcification of vascular smooth

muscle cells through RAGE/p38 MAPK. J. Vasc. Res. 2009, 46, 572–580. [CrossRef]

173. Hirose, A.; Tanikawa, T.; Mori, H.; Okada, Y.; Tanaka, Y. Advanced glycation end products increase endothelial permeability

through the RAGE/Rho signaling pathway. FEBS Lett. 2010, 584, 61–66. [CrossRef]

174. Sango, K.; Horie, H.; Okamura, A.; Inoue, S.; Takenaka, T. Diabetes impairs DRG neuronal attachment to extracellular matrix

proteins in vitro. Brain Res. Bull. 1995, 37, 533–537. [CrossRef]

175. McCarthy, A.D.; Uemura, T.; Etcheverry, S.B.; Cortizo, A.M. Advanced glycation endproducts interfere with integrin-mediated

osteoblastic attachment to a type-I collagen matrix. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2004, 36, 840–848. [CrossRef]

176. Dhar, S.; Sun, Z.; Meininger, G.A.; Hill, M.A. Nonenzymatic glycation interferes with fibronectin-integrin interactions in vascular

smooth muscle cells. Microcirculation 2017, 24, e12347. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

177. Luo, Z.J.; King, R.H.M.; Lewin, J.; Thomas, P.K. Effects of nonenzymatic glycosylation of extracellular matrix components on cell

survival and sensory neurite extension in cell culture. J. Neurol. 2002, 249, 424–431. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

178. Goncalves, N.P.; Vaegter, C.B.; Andersen, H.; Ostergaard, L.; Calcutt, N.A.; Jensen, T.S. Schwann cell interactions with axons and

microvessels in diabetic neuropathy. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2017, 13, 135–147. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

179. Xu, S.; Bao, W.; Men, X.; Liu, Y.; Sun, J.; Li, J.; Liu, H.; Cai, H.; Zhang, W.; Lou, J.; et al. Interleukin-10 protects Schwann cells
against advanced glycation end products-induced apoptosis via NF-kappaB suppression. Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. Diabetes 2020, 128,
89–96. [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

24 of 28

180. Vlassara, H.; Brownlee, M.; Cerami, A. Nonenzymatic glycosylation of peripheral nerve protein in diabetes mellitus. Proc. Natl.

Acad. Sci. USA 1981, 78, 5190–5192. [CrossRef]

181. Ooi, H.; Furukawa, A.; Takeuchi, M.; Koriyama, Y. Toxic advanced glycation end-products inhibit axonal elongation mediated by

β-tubulin aggregation in mice optic nerves. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 7409. [CrossRef]

182. Grimm, S.; Ott, C.; Hörlacher, M.; Weber, D.; Höhn, A.; Grune, T. Advanced-glycation-end-product-induced formation of

immunoproteasomes: Involvement of RAGE and Jak2/STAT1. Biochem. J. 2012, 448, 127–139. [CrossRef]

183. Li, J.H.; Wang, W.; Huang, X.R.; Oldfield, M.; Schmidt, A.M.; Cooper, M.E.; Lan, H.Y. Advanced glycation end products induce
tubular epithelial-myofibroblast transition through the RAGE-ERK1/2 MAP kinase signaling pathway. Am. J. Pathol. 2004, 164,
1389–1397. [CrossRef]

184. Guimarães, E.L.; Empsen, C.; Geerts, A.; van Grunsven, L.A. Advanced glycation end products induce production of reactive

oxygen species via the activation of NADPH oxidase in murine hepatic stellate cells. J. Hepatol. 2010, 52, 389–397. [CrossRef]

185. Ma, Y.-L.; Deng, J.; Zhang, T.; Li, H.-M.; Liang, Q.-Z.; Zhang, K.-L. Enhanced expression of RAGE/NADPH oxidase signaling
pathway and increased level of oxidative stress in brains of rats with chronic fluorosis and the protective effects of blockers. J.
Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 2023, 80, 127288. [CrossRef]

186. Verma, S.; Alam, R.; Ahmad, I.; Singla, D.; Ali, K.; Hussain, M.E. Effect of glycemic control and disease duration on cardiac
autonomic function and oxidative stress in type 2 diabetes mellitus. J. Diabetes Metab. Disord. 2018, 17, 149–158. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

187. Pal, G.K.; Adithan, C.; Ananthanarayanan, P.H.; Pal, P.; Nanda, N.; Durgadevi, T.; Lalitha, V.; Syamsunder, A.N.; Dutta,
T.K. Sympathovagal imbalance contributes to prehypertension status and cardiovascular risks attributed by insulin resistance,
inflammation, dyslipidemia and oxidative stress in first degree relatives of type 2 diabetics. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e78072. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

188. Cetin, M.; Cakici, M.; Polat, M.; Suner, A.; Zencir, C.; Ardic, I. Relation of epicardial fat thickness with carotid intima-media

thickness in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Int. J. Endocrinol. 2013, 2013, 769175. [CrossRef]

189. Groves, E.M.; Erande, A.S.; Le, C.; Salcedo, J.; Hoang, K.C.; Kumar, S.; Mohar, D.S.; Saremi, F.; Im, J.; Agrawal, Y.; et al.
Comparison of epicardial adipose tissue volume and coronary artery disease severity in asymptomatic adults with versus without
diabetes mellitus. Am. J. Cardiol. 2014, 114, 686–691. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

190. Song, D.K.; Hong, Y.S.; Lee, H.; Oh, J.Y.; Sung, Y.A.; Kim, Y.; Song, D.K.; Hong, Y.S.; Lee, H.; Oh, J.Y.; et al. Increased epicardial
adipose tissue thickness in type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity. Diabetes Metab. J. 2015, 39, 405–413. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
191. Fang, W.; Xie, S.; Deng, W. Epicardial adipose tissue: A potential therapeutic target for cardiovascular diseases. J. Cardiovasc.

Transl. Res. 2024, 17, 322–333. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

192. Wang, Z.; Wang, Y.; Chen, J.; Guo, H.; Ren, L.; Chen, X.; Chen, Y.; Sun, Y. Independent association between epicardial adipose
tissue volume and recurrence of idiopathic ventricular tachycardia after ablation. Rev. Cardiovasc. Med. 2023, 24, 189. [CrossRef]
193. Sepehri Shamloo, A.; Schoene, K.; Stauber, A.; Darma, A.; Dagres, N.; Dinov, B.; Bertagnolli, L.; Hilbert, S.; Mussigbrodt, A.;
Husser, D.; et al. Epicardial adipose tissue thickness as an independent predictor of ventricular tachycardia recurrence following
ablation. Heart Rhythm. 2019, 16, 1492–1498. [CrossRef]

194. Iacobellis, G.; Bianco, A.C. Epicardial adipose tissue: Emerging physiological, pathophysiological and clinical features. Trends

Endocrinol. Metab. 2011, 22, 450–457. [CrossRef]

195. Gonzalez, N.; Moreno-Villegas, Z.; Gonzalez-Bris, A.; Egido, J.; Lorenzo, O. Regulation of visceral and epicardial adipose tissue

for preventing cardiovascular injuries associated to obesity and diabetes. Cardiovasc. Diabetol. 2017, 16, 44. [CrossRef]

196. Iacobellis, G. Epicardial adipose tissue in contemporary cardiology. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 2022, 19, 593–606. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
197. Mukherjee, A.G.; Renu, K.; Gopalakrishnan, A.V.; Jayaraj, R.; Dey, A.; Vellingiri, B.; Ganesan, R. Epicardial adipose tissue and

cardiac lipotoxicity: A review. Life Sci. 2023, 328, 121913. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

198. Liu, C.; Feng, X.; Li, Q.; Wang, Y.; Li, Q.; Hua, M. Adiponectin, TNF-alpha and inflammatory cytokines and risk of type 2 diabetes:

A systematic review and meta-analysis. Cytokine 2016, 86, 100–109. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

199. Ziegler, D.; Strom, A.; Strassburger, K.; Knebel, B.; Bonhof, G.J.; Kotzka, J.; Szendroedi, J.; Roden, M. Association of cardiac
autonomic dysfunction with higher levels of plasma lipid metabolites in recent-onset type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 2021, 64,
458–468. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

200. Schrauwen, P.; Schrauwen-Hinderling, V.; Hoeks, J.; Hesselink, M.K. Mitochondrial dysfunction and lipotoxicity. Biochim. Biophys.

Acta 2010, 1801, 266–271. [CrossRef]

201. Romer, A.; Linn, T.; Petry, S.F. Lipotoxic impairment of mitochondrial function in beta-cells: A review. Antioxidants 2021, 10, 293.

[CrossRef]

202. Ayala, A.; Munoz, M.F.; Arguelles, S. Lipid peroxidation: Production, metabolism, and signaling mechanisms of malondialdehyde

and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal. Oxid. Med. Cell Longev. 2014, 2014, 360438. [CrossRef]

203. Guo, C.; Sun, L.; Chen, X.; Zhang, D. Oxidative stress, mitochondrial damage and neurodegenerative diseases. Neural Regen. Res.

2013, 8, 2003–2014.

204. Bhat, A.H.; Dar, K.B.; Anees, S.; Zargar, M.A.; Masood, A.; Sofi, M.A.; Ganie, S.A. Oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction

and neurodegenerative diseases; a mechanistic insight. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2015, 74, 101–110. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

25 of 28

205. Li, R.L.; Wang, L.Y.; Duan, H.X.; Zhang, Q.; Guo, X.; Wu, C.; Peng, W. Regulation of mitochondrial dysfunction induced cell
apoptosis is a potential therapeutic strategy for herbal medicine to treat neurodegenerative diseases. Front. Pharmacol. 2022, 13,
937289. [CrossRef]

206. Rumora, A.E.; Guo, K.; Hinder, L.M.; O’Brien, P.D.; Hayes, J.M.; Hur, J.; Feldman, E.L. A high-fat diet disrupts nerve lipids and

mitochondrial function in murine models of neuropathy. Front. Physiol. 2022, 13, 921942. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

207. Oltman, C.L.; Coppey, L.J.; Gellett, J.S.; Davidson, E.P.; Lund, D.D.; Yorek, M.A. Progression of vascular and neural dysfunction
in sciatic nerves of Zucker diabetic fatty and Zucker rats. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2005, 289, E113–E122. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

208. Lupachyk, S.; Watcho, P.; Hasanova, N.; Julius, U.; Obrosova, I.G. Triglyceride, nonesterified fatty acids, and prediabetic

neuropathy: Role for oxidative-nitrosative stress. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2012, 52, 1255–1263. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

209. Toczylowski, K.; Hirnle, T.; Harasiuk, D.; Zabielski, P.; Lewczuk, A.; Dmitruk, I.; Ksiazek, M.; Sulik, A.; Gorski, J.; Chabowski,
A.; et al. Plasma concentration and expression of adipokines in epicardial and subcutaneous adipose tissue are associated with
impaired left ventricular filling pattern. J. Transl. Med. 2019, 17, 310. [CrossRef]

210. Rodriguez, A.; Becerril, S.; Hernandez-Pardos, A.W.; Fruhbeck, G. Adipose tissue depot differences in adipokines and effects on

skeletal and cardiac muscle. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 2020, 52, 1–8. [CrossRef]

211. Abraham, T.M.; Pedley, A.; Massaro, J.M.; Hoffmann, U.; Fox, C.S. Association between visceral and subcutaneous adipose depots

and incident cardiovascular disease risk factors. Circulation 2015, 132, 1639–1647. [CrossRef]

212. Jung, C.H.; Jung, S.H.; Kim, B.Y.; Kim, C.H.; Kang, S.K.; Mok, J.O. Association of serum omentin levels with cardiac autonomic
neuropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A hospital-based study. Cardiovasc. Diabetol. 2015, 14, 140. [CrossRef]
213. Jung, C.H.; Kim, B.Y.; Kim, C.H.; Kang, S.K.; Jung, S.H.; Mok, J.O. Association of serum adipocytokine levels with cardiac

autonomic neuropathy in type 2 diabetic patients. Cardiovasc. Diabetol. 2012, 11, 24. [CrossRef]

214. Lai, Y.-R.; Chiu, W.-C.; Cheng, B.-C.; Chen, J.-F.; Tsai, N.-W.; Huang, C.-C.; Lu, C.-H. Associations between adipocytokines and

severity of cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in well-controlled type 2 diabetes and prediabetes. Preprint 2020. [CrossRef]

215. Patraca, I.; Martinez, N.; Busquets, O.; Marti, A.; Pedros, I.; Beas-Zarate, C.; Marin, M.; Ettcheto, M.; Sureda, F.; Auladell, C.;
et al. Anti-inflammatory role of leptin in glial cells through p38 MAPK pathway inhibition. Pharmacol. Rep. 2017, 69, 409–418.
[CrossRef]

216. Perez-Perez, A.; Sanchez-Jimenez, F.; Vilarino-Garcia, T.; Sanchez-Margalet, V. Role of leptin in inflammation and vice versa. Int.

J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 5887. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

217. Santos, C.L.; Bobermin, L.D.; Souza, D.O.; Quincozes-Santos, A. Leptin stimulates the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines in

hypothalamic astrocyte cultures from adult and aged rats. Metab. Brain Dis. 2018, 33, 2059–2063. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

218. Cernea, S.; Both, E.; Hutanu, A.; Sular, F.L.; Roiban, A.L. Correlations of serum leptin and leptin resistance with depression and

anxiety in patients with type 2 diabetes. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 2019, 73, 745–753. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

219. Goncalves, A.C.; Tank, J.; Diedrich, A.; Hilzendeger, A.; Plehm, R.; Bader, M.; Luft, F.C.; Jordan, J.; Gross, V. Diabetic hypertensive
leptin receptor-deficient db/db mice develop cardioregulatory autonomic dysfunction. Hypertension 2009, 53, 387–392. [CrossRef]
220. Fruhbeck, G.; Catalan, V.; Rodriguez, A.; Ramirez, B.; Becerril, S.; Portincasa, P.; Gomez-Ambrosi, J. Normalization of adiponectin
concentrations by leptin replacement in ob/ob mice is accompanied by reductions in systemic oxidative stress and inflammation.
Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 2752. [CrossRef]

221. Yagishita, Y.; Uruno, A.; Fukutomi, T.; Saito, R.; Saigusa, D.; Pi, J.; Fukamizu, A.; Sugiyama, F.; Takahashi, S.; Yamamoto, M. Nrf2
improves leptin and insulin resistance provoked by hypothalamic oxidative stress. Cell Rep. 2017, 18, 2030–2044. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

222. Al-Kuraishy, H.; Abdul-Hadi, M.; Naji, M.; Shams, H.; Sami, O.; Al-Harchan, N.-A.; Al-Gareeb, A. Oxidative stress injury and
glucolipotoxicity in type 2 diabetes mellitus: The potential role of metformin and sitagliptin. Biomed. Biotechnol. Res. J. (BBRJ)
2020, 4, 166–172. [CrossRef]

223. Bakkar, N.Z.; Dwaib, H.S.; Fares, S.; Eid, A.H.; Al-Dhaheri, Y.; El-Yazbi, A.F. Cardiac autonomic neuropathy: A progressive
consequence of chronic low-grade inflammation in type 2 diabetes and related metabolic disorders. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9005.
[CrossRef]

224. Cerf, M.E. Cardiac glucolipotoxicity and cardiovascular outcomes. Medicina 2018, 54, 70. [CrossRef]
225. Herder, C.; Schamarek, I.; Nowotny, B.; Carstensen-Kirberg, M.; Strassburger, K.; Nowotny, P.; Kannenberg, J.M.; Strom, A.;
Puttgen, S.; Mussig, K.; et al. Inflammatory markers are associated with cardiac autonomic dysfunction in recent-onset type 2
diabetes. Heart 2017, 103, 63–70. [CrossRef]

226. Cinti, S.; Mitchell, G.; Barbatelli, G.; Murano, I.; Ceresi, E.; Faloia, E.; Wang, S.; Fortier, M.; Greenberg, A.S.; Obin, M.S. Adipocyte
death defines macrophage localization and function in adipose tissue of obese mice and humans. J. Lipid Res. 2005, 46, 2347–2355.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

227. Weisberg, S.P.; McCann, D.; Desai, M.; Rosenbaum, M.; Leibel, R.L.; Ferrante, A.W., Jr. Obesity is associated with macrophage

accumulation in adipose tissue. J. Clin. Investig. 2003, 112, 1796–1808. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

228. Meier, B.; Radeke, H.H.; Selle, S.; Younes, M.; Sies, H.; Resch, K.; Habermehl, G.G. Human fibroblasts release reactive oxygen

species in response to interleukin-1 or tumour necrosis factor-α. Biochem. J. 1989, 263, 539–545. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

229. Griffin, M.J. On the immunometabolic role of NF-kappaB in adipocytes. Immunometabolism 2022, 4, e220003. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

26 of 28

230. Sen, A.; Mohanraj, P.S.; Ranjan, A.; Rajendran, V.; ArulVijayaVani, S.; Balan, Y.; Bansal, A. Unraveling the role of tumor necrosis
factor-alpha in diabetic peripheral neuropathy: A systematic review and Meta-analysis. Cureus 2023, 15, e49926. [CrossRef]
231. Kaur, P.; Kotru, S.; Singh, S.; Munshi, A. Role of miRNAs in diabetic neuropathy: Mechanisms and possible interventions. Mol.

Neurobiol. 2022, 59, 1836–1849. [CrossRef]

232. Zhang, J.; Cui, C.; Xu, H. Downregulation of miR-145-5p elevates retinal ganglion cell survival to delay diabetic retinopathy

progress by targeting FGF5. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 2019, 83, 1655–1662. [CrossRef]

233. Pavlov, V.A.; Tracey, K.J. The vagus nerve and the inflammatory reflex--linking immunity and metabolism. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol.

2012, 8, 743–754. [CrossRef]

234. Bonaz, B.; Sinniger, V.; Pellissier, S. Anti-inflammatory properties of the vagus nerve: Potential therapeutic implications of vagus

nerve stimulation. J. Physiol. 2016, 594, 5781–5790. [CrossRef]

235. Maser, R.E.; Lenhard, M.J.; Pohlig, R.T. Vitamin D insufficiency is associated with reduced parasympathetic nerve fiber function

in type 2 diabetes. Endocr. Pract. 2015, 21, 174–181. [CrossRef]

236. Jung, C.H.; Jung, S.H.; Kim, K.J.; Kim, B.Y.; Kim, C.H.; Kang, S.K.; Mok, J.O. The relationship between vitamin D status and
cardiac autonomic neuropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Vasc. Dis. Res. 2015, 12, 342–351. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

237. Luo, X.; Xiong, J.; Cai, H.; Zou, R.; Li, F.; Wang, Y.; Wang, C. Effects of vitamin D deficiency on the function of the cardiac

autonomic nervous system in rats. Cardiovasc. Ther. 2022, 2022, 4366948. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

238. Hansen, C.S.; Jensen, J.S.; Ridderstrale, M.; Vistisen, D.; Jorgensen, M.E.; Fleischer, J. Vitamin B12 deficiency is associated with
cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes. J. Diabetes Complicat. 2017, 31, 202–208. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

239. Meher, M.; Panda, J.K. Impact of glycemic control over cardiac autonomic neuropathy. J. Diabetes Metab. Disord. 2020, 19,

1339–1344. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

240. Silva, L.R.B.; Gentil, P.; Seguro, C.S.; de Oliveira, G.T.; Silva, M.S.; Zamuner, A.R.; Beltrame, T.; Rebelo, A.C.S. High fasting
glycemia predicts impairment of cardiac autonomic control in adults with type 2 diabetes: A case-control study. Front. Endocrinol.
2021, 12, 760292. [CrossRef]

241. Tarvainen, M.P.; Laitinen, T.P.; Lipponen, J.A.; Cornforth, D.J.; Jelinek, H.F. Cardiac autonomic dysfunction in type 2 diabetes—

Effect of hyperglycemia and disease duration. Front. Endocrinol. 2014, 5, 130. [CrossRef]

242. Jacobson, A.M. Impact of improved glycemic control on quality of life in patients with diabetes. Endocr. Pract. 2004, 10, 502–508.

[CrossRef]

243. Cassidy, S.; Vaidya, V.; Houghton, D.; Zalewski, P.; Seferovic, J.P.; Hallsworth, K.; MacGowan, G.A.; Trenell, M.I.; Jakovljevic, D.G.
Unsupervised high-intensity interval training improves glycaemic control but not cardiovascular autonomic function in type 2
diabetes patients: A randomised controlled trial. Diabetes Vasc. Dis. Res. 2019, 16, 69–76. [CrossRef]

244. Stahn, A.; Pistrosch, F.; Ganz, X.; Teige, M.; Koehler, C.; Bornstein, S.; Hanefeld, M. Relationship between hypoglycemic episodes
and ventricular arrhythmias in patients with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular diseases: Silent hypoglycemias and silent
arrhythmias. Diabetes Care 2014, 37, 516–520. [CrossRef]

245. Li, G.; Zhong, S.; Wang, X.; Zhuge, F. Association of hypoglycaemia with the risks of arrhythmia and mortality in individuals

with diabetes—A systematic review and meta-analysis. Front. Endocrinol. 2023, 14, 1222409. [CrossRef]

246. Achmad, C.; Lim, N.S.; Pramudyo, M.; Iqbal, M.; Karwiky, G.; Febrianora, M.; Natalia, N. Relation between glycemic control
and cardiac autonomic neuropathy in patients with diabetes mellitus type 2. Curr. Probl. Cardiol. 2023, 48, 101135. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

247. Ostropolets, A.; Elias, P.A.; Reyes, M.V.; Wan, E.Y.; Pajvani, U.B.; Hripcsak, G.; Morrow, J.P. Metformin is associated with a lower
risk of atrial fibrillation and ventricular arrhythmias compared with sulfonylureas: An observational study. Circ. Arrhythm.
Electrophysiol. 2021, 14, e009115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

248. Lee, T.T.L.; Hui, J.M.H.; Lee, Y.H.A.; Satti, D.I.; Shum, Y.K.L.; Kiu, P.T.H.; Wai, A.K.C.; Liu, T.; Wong, W.T.; Chan, J.S.K.; et al.
Sulfonylurea is associated with higher risks of ventricular arrhythmia or sudden cardiac death compared with metformin: A
population-based cohort study. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2022, 11, e026289. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

249. Islam, N.; Reynier, P.; Douros, A.; Yu, O.H.Y.; Filion, K.B. Sulphonylureas versus metformin and the risk of ventricular arrhythmias
among people with type 2 diabetes: A population-based cohort study. Diabetes Obes. Metab. 2023, 25, 1523–1533. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

250. Manica, D.; Sandri, G.; da Silva, G.B.; Manica, A.; da Silva Rosa Bonadiman, B.; Dos Santos, D.; Flores, E.M.M.; Bolzan, R.C.;
Barcelos, R.C.S.; Tomazoni, F.; et al. Evaluation of the effects of metformin on antioxidant biomarkers and mineral levels in
patients with type II diabetes mellitus: A cross-sectional study. J. Diabetes Complicat. 2023, 37, 108497. [CrossRef]

251. Kristofi, R.; Eriksson, J.W. Metformin as an anti-inflammatory agent: A short review. J. Endocrinol. 2021, 251, R11–R22. [CrossRef]
252. Sakata, N. The anti-inflammatory effect of metformin: The molecular targets. Genes. Cells 2024, 29, 183–191. [CrossRef]
253. Syngle, A.; Chahal, S.; Vohra, K. Efficacy and tolerability of DPP4 inhibitor, teneligliptin, on autonomic and peripheral neuropathy

in type 2 diabetes: An open label, pilot study. Neurol. Sci. 2021, 42, 1429–1436. [CrossRef]

254. Sano, M. Mechanism by which dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors increase the risk of heart failure and possible differences in heart

failure risk. J. Cardiol. 2019, 73, 28–32. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

27 of 28

255. Packer, M. Do DPP-4 inhibitors cause heart failure events by promoting adrenergically mediated cardiotoxicity? Clues from

laboratory models and clinical trials. Circ. Res. 2018, 122, 928–932. [CrossRef]

256. Drucker, D.J. Mechanisms of action and therapeutic application of glucagon-like peptide-1. Cell Metab. 2018, 27, 740–756.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

257. Baggio, L.L.; Ussher, J.R.; McLean, B.A.; Cao, X.; Kabir, M.G.; Mulvihill, E.E.; Mighiu, A.S.; Zhang, H.; Ludwig, A.; Seeley, R.J.;
et al. The autonomic nervous system and cardiac GLP-1 receptors control heart rate in mice. Mol. Metab. 2017, 6, 1339–1349.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

258. Ang, R.; Mastitskaya, S.; Hosford, P.S.; Basalay, M.; Specterman, M.; Aziz, Q.; Li, Y.; Orini, M.; Taggart, P.; Lambiase, P.D.; et al.
Modulation of cardiac ventricular excitability by GLP-1 (glucagon-like peptide-1). Circ. Arrhythm. Electrophysiol. 2018, 11, e006740.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

259. Kumarathurai, P.; Anholm, C.; Larsen, B.S.; Olsen, R.H.; Madsbad, S.; Kristiansen, O.; Nielsen, O.W.; Haugaard, S.B.; Sajadieh, A.
Effects of liraglutide on heart rate and heart rate variability: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover study.
Diabetes Care 2017, 40, 117–124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

260. Nystrom, T.; Santos-Pardo, I.; Fang, X.; Cao, Y.; Hedberg, F.; Jendle, J. Heart rate variability in type 2 diabetic subjects randomized
to liraglutide or glimepiride treatment, both in combination with metformin: A randomized, open, parallel-group study.
Endocrinol. Diabetes Metab. 2019, 2, e00058. [CrossRef]

261. Greco, C.; Santi, D.; Brigante, G.; Pacchioni, C.; Simoni, M. Effect of the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists on autonomic
function in subjects with diabetes: A systematic review and Meta-analysis. Diabetes Metab. J. 2022, 46, 901–911. [CrossRef]
262. Wei, J.; Wang, R.; Ye, H.; Wang, Y.; Wang, L.; Zhang, X. Effects of GLP-1 receptor agonists on arrhythmias and its subtypes in
patients with type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Front. Endocrinol. (Lausanne) 2022, 13, 910256. [CrossRef]

263. Chao, E.C. SGLT-2 inhibitors: A new mechanism for glycemic control. Clin. Diabetes 2014, 32, 4–11. [CrossRef]
264. Balcioglu, A.S.; Celik, E.; Sahin, M.; Gocer, K.; Aksu, E.; Aykan, A.C. Dapagliflozin improves cardiac autonomic function measures

in type 2 diabetic patients with cardiac autonomic neuropathy. Anatol. J. Cardiol. 2022, 26, 832–840. [CrossRef]

265. Fujiki, S.; Iijima, K.; Nakagawa, Y.; Takahashi, K.; Okabe, M.; Kusano, K.; Owada, S.; Kondo, Y.; Tsujita, K.; Shimizu, W.; et al. Effect
of empagliflozin on ventricular arrhythmias in patients with type 2 diabetes treated with an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator:
The EMPA-ICD trial. Cardiovasc. Diabetol. 2024, 23, 224. [CrossRef]

266. Patoulias, D.; Katsimardou, A.; Fragakis, N.; Papadopoulos, C.; Doumas, M. Effect of SGLT-2 inhibitors on cardiac autonomic
function in type 2 diabetes mellitus: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Acta Diabetol. 2023, 60, 1–8. [CrossRef]
267. Chindhalore, C.A.; Dakhale, G.N.; Kamble, P.H.; Rathod, B.D.; Kumbhalkar, S.; Phatak, M.S. Effect of ramipril on cardiac

autonomic neuropathy in patients with type II diabetes mellitus. Cureus 2023, 15, e36209. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

268. Didangelos, T.; Tziomalos, K.; Margaritidis, C.; Kontoninas, Z.; Stergiou, I.; Tsotoulidis, S.; Karlafti, E.; Mourouglakis, A.;
Hatzitolios, A.I. Efficacy of administration of an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor for two years on autonomic and
peripheral neuropathy in patients with diabetes mellitus. J. Diabetes Res. 2017, 2017, 6719239. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

269. Malik, R.A.; Williamson, S.; Abbott, C.; Carrington, A.L.; Iqbal, J.; Schady, W.; Boulton, A.J. Effect of angiotensin-converting-
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor trandolapril on human diabetic neuropathy: Randomised double-blind controlled trial. Lancet 1998, 352,
1978–1981. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

270. Fabiyi-Edebor, T.D. Vitamin C ameliorated cardiac autonomic neuropathy in type 2 diabetic rats. World J. Diabetes 2020, 11, 52–65.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

271. Manzella, D.; Barbieri, M.; Ragno, E.; Paolisso, G. Chronic administration of pharmacologic doses of vitamin E improves the

cardiac autonomic nervous system in patients with type 2 diabetes. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2001, 73, 1052–1057. [CrossRef]

272. Lee, S.J.; Jeong, S.J.; Lee, Y.C.; Lee, Y.H.; Lee, J.E.; Kim, C.H.; Min, K.W.; Cha, B.Y. Effects of high-dose alpha-lipoic acid on heart
rate variability of type 2 diabetes mellitus patients with cardiac autonomic neuropathy in Korea. Diabetes Metab. J. 2017, 41,
275–283. [CrossRef]

273. Ziegler, D.; Schatz, H.; Conrad, F.; Gries, F.A.; Ulrich, H.; Reichel, G. Effects of treatment with the antioxidant α-lipoic acid on
cardiac autonomic neuropathy in NIDDM patients: A 4-month randomized controlled multicenter trial (DEKAN Study). Diabetes
Care 1997, 20, 369–373. [CrossRef]

274. Mendoza-Nunez, V.M.; Garcia-Martinez, B.I.; Rosado-Perez, J.; Santiago-Osorio, E.; Pedraza-Chaverri, J.; Hernandez-Abad, V.J.
The effect of 600 mg alpha-lipoic acid supplementation on oxidative stress, inflammation, and RAGE in older adults with type 2
diabetes mellitus. Oxid. Med. Cell Longev. 2019, 2019, 3276958. [CrossRef]

275. Hoang, J.D.; Yamakawa, K.; Rajendran, P.S.; Chan, C.A.; Yagishita, D.; Nakamura, K.; Lux, R.L.; Vaseghi, M. Proarrhythmic effects
of sympathetic activation are mitigated by vagal nerve stimulation in infarcted hearts. JACC Clin. Electrophysiol. 2022, 8, 513–525.
[CrossRef]

276. Zhao, S.; Dai, Y.; Ning, X.; Tang, M.; Zhao, Y.; Li, Z.; Zhang, S. Vagus nerve stimulation in early stage of acute myocardial
infarction prevent ventricular arrhythmias and cardiac remodeling. Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 2021, 8, 648910. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
277. Winter, J.; Tipton, M.J.; Shattock, M.J. Autonomic conflict exacerbates long QT associated ventricular arrhythmias. J. Mol. Cell.

Cardiol. 2018, 116, 145–154. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

278. Wang, Q.; Cheng, Y.; Xue, F.-S.; Yuan, Y.-J.; Xiong, J.; Li, R.-P.; Liao, X.; Liu, J.-H. Postconditioning with vagal stimulation
attenuates local and systemic inflammatory responses to myocardial ischemia reperfusion injury in rats. Inflamm. Res. 2012, 61,
1273–1282. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 12464

28 of 28

279. Gupta, R.; Imai, M.; Jiang, A.; Wang, M.; Sabbah, H. Chronic therapy with selective electric vagus nerve stimulation normalizes
plasma concentration of tissue necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-6 and B-Type natriuretic peptide in dogs with heart failure. Am.
Coll. Cardiol. 2006, 47, 77A–78A.

280. Samniang, B.; Shinlapawittayatorn, K.; Chunchai, T.; Pongkan, W.; Kumfu, S.; Chattipakorn, S.C.; KenKnight, B.H.; Chattipakorn,
N. Vagus nerve stimulation improves cardiac function by preventing mitochondrial dysfunction in obese-insulin resistant rats.
Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 19749. [CrossRef]

281. Payne, S.C.; Ward, G.; Fallon, J.B.; Hyakumura, T.; Prins, J.B.; Andrikopoulos, S.; MacIsaac, R.J.; Villalobos, J. Blood glucose
modulation and safety of efferent vagus nerve stimulation in a type 2 diabetic rat model. Physiol. Rep. 2022, 10, e15257. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

