iScience

ll

OPEN ACCESS

Article
A single cell transcriptomics map of paracrine
networks in the intrinsic cardiac nervous system

Alison Moss,
Shaina Robbins,
Sirisha Achanta, ...,
Kalyanam
Shivkumar, James
S. Schwaber,
Rajanikanth
Vadigepalli

kshivkumar@mednet.ucla.edu

(K.S.)
james.schwaber@jefferson.
edu (J.S.S.)
rajanikanth.vadigepalli@
jefferson.edu (R.V.)

Highlights
Spatially-tracked single
neuron transcriptomics
map of intrinsic cardiac
ganglia

Distinct composition of
intrinsic cardiac neurons
compared to the central
neurons

Correlation of cholinergic
and catecholaminergic
markers suggesting
neuroplasticity

Adaptive and dynamic
system driven by putative
paracrine
neuromodulatory
networks

Moss et al., iScience 24,
102713
July 23, 2021 ª 2021 The
Authors.
https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.isci.2021.102713

iScience

ll

OPEN ACCESS

Article
A single cell transcriptomics map of paracrine
networks in the intrinsic cardiac nervous system

Alison Moss,1,5 Shaina Robbins,1,5 Sirisha Achanta,1,5 Lakshmi Kuttippurathu,1 Scott Turick,1 Sean Nieves,1
Peter Hanna,2 Elizabeth H. Smith,3 Donald B. Hoover,3 Jin Chen,4 Zixi (Jack) Cheng,4 Jeffrey L. Ardell,2
Kalyanam Shivkumar,2,* James S. Schwaber,1,* and Rajanikanth Vadigepalli1,6,*

SUMMARY
We developed a spatially-tracked single neuron transcriptomics map of an
intrinsic cardiac ganglion, the right atrial ganglionic plexus (RAGP) that is a critical
mediator of sinoatrial node (SAN) activity. This 3D representation of RAGP used
neuronal tracing to extensively map the spatial distribution of the subset of neu-
rons that project to the SAN. RNA-seq of laser capture microdissected neurons
revealed a distinct composition of RAGP neurons compared to the central ner-
vous system and a surprising ﬁnding that cholinergic and catecholaminergic
markers are coexpressed, suggesting multipotential phenotypes that can drive
neuroplasticity within RAGP. High-throughput qPCR of hundreds of laser capture
microdissected single neurons conﬁrmed these ﬁndings and revealed a high
dimensionality of neuromodulatory factors that contribute to dynamic control
of the heart. Neuropeptide-receptor coexpression analysis revealed a combina-
torial paracrine neuromodulatory network within RAGP informing follow-on
studies on the vagal control of RAGP to regulate cardiac function in health and
disease.

INTRODUCTION

In this study, we performed a spatially-tracked single-cell transcriptomic analysis of an intrinsic cardiac gan-
glion in the pig heart to uncover the complex molecular landscape and putative paracrine neuromodula-
tory networks. The functional signiﬁcance and complexity of the intrinsic cardiac nervous system (ICNS) has
been studied for years with the majority of the focus on the physiological aspects. The ganglia at the heart
are thought to constitute a ‘‘little brain’’ with afferent, parasympathetic and sympathetic components (Ar-
mour, 2008; Hoard et al., 2007; Neel and Parsons, 1986; Parsons et al., 1987; Wake and Brack, 2016; Weihe
et al., 2005). Physiological studies using epicardial ablation have demonstrated that the intrinsic cardiac
ganglia mediate central control of cardiac function through vagal and sympathetic circuits (Berger et al.,
2019; Driessen et al., 2016; Qin et al., 2017). Yet, little is known about the distribution and organization
of the molecular proﬁles of the neurons constituting the intrinsic cardiac ganglia. Recent single neuron
gene expression proﬁling studies have uncovered the wide range of molecularly-deﬁned subtypes (Hu
et al., 2017; Kupari et al., 2019), gradient-based organization driven by inputs to neurons (Park et al,
2014, 2016; Shen et al., 2012), as well as molecular plasticity during homeostatic conditions and physiolog-
ical perturbations (Dulcis et al., 2013; Park et al, 2014, 2016) in the central nervous system (CNS) as well as in
the peripheral ganglia (Kupari et al., 2019). We set out to pursue such approaches and combine them
with 3D positional information within the tissue to develop an extensive spatially-tracked molecular map
of the ICNS.

In the present study, we focus on the RAGP as a key control point in the circuit that mediates vagal mod-
ulation of the SA node (SAN) activity. The routes of parasympathetic and sympathetic control of SAN were
determined by several studies; surgical ablation of different areas of the heart and vagal stimulation
showing a shift in pacemaker activity (Bouman et al., 1968; Geis et al., 1973; Randall and Ardell, 1985). Stim-
ulation of the RAGP fat pad was shown to cause a reduction in heart rate in dogs and human patients and
cause a pacemaker shift (Butler et al., 1990; Carlson et al., 1992; Furukawa et al., 1990). Later studies
ablating RAGP showed that this group of neurons is critical to the cardiac pacemaker response to vagal
stimulation (McGuirt et al., 1997). Molecular analysis of RAGP, and ICNS in general, has largely been

1Daniel Baugh Institute of
Functional
Genomics/Computational
Biology, Department of
Pathology, Anatomy, and
Cell Biology, Thomas
Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA

2University of California Los
Angeles (UCLA) Cardiac
Arrhythmia Center and
Neurocardiology Research
Program of Excellence,
Department of Medicine,
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA

3Department of Biomedical
Sciences, James H. Quillen
College of Medicine, East
Tennessee State University,
Johnson City, TN, USA

4Burnett School of
Biomedical Sciences, College
of Medicine, University of
Central Florida, Orlando, FL,
USA

5These authors contributed
equally

6Lead contact

*Correspondence:
kshivkumar@mednet.ucla.
edu (K.S.),
james.schwaber@jefferson.
edu (J.S.S.),
rajanikanth.vadigepalli@
jefferson.edu (R.V.)

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.
2021.102713

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021 ª 2021 The Authors.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

1

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

Figure 1. Mapping spatially-tracked single-cell transcriptomics onto an imaging-based 3D tissue reconstruction
of pig right atrial ganglionic plexus (RAGP)

(A) Integrated workﬂow starting from injection of neuronal tracer into the sinoatrial node (SAN) region of the pig heart,
followed by isolation, embedding, and cryosectioning of the RAGP, acquisition of block face images for 3D
reconstruction, staining for neuronal localization within the tissue, and obtaining spatially-tracked single neuron samples
via laser capture microdissection (LCM) for downstream processing using RNA-seq and high-throughput real-time PCR
(HT-qPCR), yielding transcriptomic data that is mapped onto a 3D anatomical framework. Scale bars: 50 mm.
(B) Representative visualization of the 3D anatomical framework of an RAGP depicting the location of spatially-tracked
single neurons sampled via LCM (purple dots - neuronal samples for RNA-seq; yellow dots - neuronal samples for HT-
qPCR). The cross-sections of the stack show the corresponding tissue sections from which the neuronal samples were
obtained. Scale bars: whole tissue sections, 500 mm; regional lift zoom 1, 500 mm; regional lift zoom 2, 100 mm; isolated

2

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

iScience
Article

ll

OPEN ACCESS

Figure 1. Continued
neuron zoom 1, 100 mm; isolated neuron zoom 2, 50 mm. The relative expression of PGP9.5 in these spatially-tracked
neuronal samples is shown with reference to the axes of the 3D stack. The bounding box on the lower panel shows
18.8 mm, 19.4 mm, and 16 mm on the x, y, and z axis, respectively.
(C–E) Proportion of samples that showed detectable and abundant expression of select pan-neuronal markers (C),
cholinergic and catecholaminergic markers (D), and neuropeptides (E), as assessed by HT-qPCR. Data shown is based on
combining 405 single neuron samples across n = 4 animals.

targeted at the protein level using immunolabeling. The majority of the cardiac ganglia have been found to
be cholinergic (ChAT+) (Hoard et al, 2007, 2008; Horackova et al., 2000; Richardson et al., 2003; Rysevaite
et al., 2011), while the proportion of observed catecholaminergic (TH+) neurons was widely variable across
studies (Hoard et al., 2008; Hoover et al., 2009; Richardson et al., 2003; Rysevaite et al., 2011). Additionally,
some studies have reported co-expression of ChAT and TH in 10–20% of ICNS neurons (Rysevaite et al.,
2011; Zarzoso et al., 2013). The expression of other neurotransmitter/neuromodulator systems such as
NPY, GAL, and SST have also been described within ICNS (Day et al., 1985; Habecker et al., 2005; Herring,
2015; Herring et al., 2012; Ho¨ kfelt et al., 1977; Moriarty et al., 1992). Here, we undertake a broad-based sur-
vey to characterize the gene expression of a wide range of neuromodulators underlying the dynamic
neuronal control of cardiac function and their co-expression in single neurons within the RAGP.

In a recent proof-of-principle study, we demonstrated a coordinated experimental approach that inte-
grates imaging technologies with high throughput gene expression data (HT-qRTPCR) to develop a 3D
anatomical and molecular map of rat ICNS (Achanta et al., 2020). Here, we build on that approach to incor-
porate single-cell scale RNA-seq and precisely integrate molecular data into a digitally reconstructed 3D
RAGP with anatomical context of the pig heart. This approach contrasts with that of typical droplet-based
single-cell transcriptomics techniques in that the spatial and anatomical information of each sample is
extensively tracked, which allows mapping of the molecular information into a 3D-reconstructed anatom-
ical organization of the tissue. Such an integrated anatomical-molecular map permits analysis of relation-
ships between spatial location and molecular proﬁles, within the tissue as well as reference to adjacent
anatomical features (Achanta et al., 2020; Park et al., 2016). We now ﬁnd consistent neuroanatomical struc-
ture and diverse molecular properties of ganglia in the ICNS of a large porcine mammal, accepted as close
to human. Our newly developed data demonstrate that the local cardiac ganglia harbor anatomical and
molecular features necessary to function as complex signal processing units that critically mediate vagal
control of heart function and health (Hanna et al., 2021).

RESULTS
Mapping spatially-tracked single-cell transcriptomics onto an imaging-based 3D tissue
reconstruction of pig right atrial ganglionic plexus

We developed a 3D map of the single neuron scale gene expression within the pig RAGP. We used our
recently developed method pipeline that combines single neuron anatomical position using 3D mapping
with gene expression data of the mapped neurons obtained from single-cell scale RNA-seq and high-
throughput qRT-PCR (HT-qPCR) (Achanta et al., 2020) (Figure 1A). The RAGP neurons that project to
SAN were labeled by a tracer that was injected into the SAN 3 weeks prior to sacriﬁcing the animal for tissue
harvesting. The heart tissue corresponding to the location of RAGP was sectioned serially from superior to
inferior end for laser capture microdissection (LCM) of single neurons and neuron pools (n = 4 animals).
During sectioning, blockface images were obtained, which were contoured and organized into a 3D image
stack (2,698 images across n = 4 animals). After sectioning and staining, the tissue was subjected to LCM
where both FastBlue labeled (SAN-projecting) and unlabeled (considered as Non SAN-projecting in the
present analysis) single neurons were collected for microﬂuidic HT-qPCR (405 single neurons X 241 genes
per neuron across 4 RAGP) and regional neuronal lifts were collected for single-cell scale RNA-seq (90
neuron pools from one RAGP). Image tracking was used to digitally annotate the spatial locations for sin-
gle-cell neuronal samples on a digitally reconstructed RAGP using TissueMapper software (Figure 1B,
Video S1). Expression levels of Uchl1 (PGP9.5), a pan neuronal marker, showed a wide range that is persis-
tent throughout the RAGP with no spatial bias for enhancement or depletion (Figures 1B and 1C). We as-
sessed all single neuron samples for expression of typical neuronal markers, cholinergic and catecholamin-
ergic markers, and key neuropeptides (Figures 1C–1E). Nearly 100% of all collected samples not only
showed detectable expression but also abundant expression of NeuN, a common neuronal marker (Gusel’-
nikova and Korzhevskiy, 2015). PGP9.5 and Map2, another neuron-speciﬁc gene (Schoﬁeld et al., 1995;

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

3

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

Soltani et al., 2005), were also abundantly expressed in a large majority of the sampled single neurons (Fig-
ure 1C). A high percentage of neurons showed abundant expression of Chat, Th, and to some extent, Dbh,
suggesting a high degree of co-expression between cholinergic and catecholaminergic markers across sin-
gle RAGP neurons (Figure 1D). Neuropeptides such as Neuropeptide Y (Npy), Galanin (Gal), and Somato-
statin (Sst) also showed abundant expression in a high proportion of neurons in the RAGP (Figure 1E).

Transcriptomic landscape of pig RAGP from a single-cell scale RNAseq analysis

142 regional neuronal samples from the RAGP of a female Yucatan minipig were collected through LCM
and spatially tracked as described above and subjected to single-cell scale RNA-seq using the Smart-
3SEQ protocol (Foley et al., 2019) (described in STAR methods). After quality check we were left with 90
samples with detectable expression in 15,000 genes. Using publicly available data in the GTEx database
(GTEx Consortium, 2013), we retrieved a list of genes that are statistically enriched in neuronal tissues
compared to other tissue types (p< 0.01). A total of 1,639 neuronally enriched genes showed detectable
expression in our RNA-seq data (Figure 2A). Of note, genes for ion channels associated with calcium
signaling as well as glutamatergic receptors were expressed at high levels throughout the RAGP
(Figure 2B).

The transcriptomic landscape of the neuronally enriched sample set was assessed through a nonlinear
embedding approach, t-stochastic neighbor embedding (tSNE) (Maaten and Hinton, 2008). The results
show that the samples were not separated into groups corresponding to distinguishable phenotypes,
but were instead organized as a single cloud suggesting a gradient of gene expression based organization
of underlying neuronal molecular states (Park et al., 2014). Coloring the tSNE map for relative expression of
Chat, an important marker for cholinergic expression, reveals a distinct gradient across the transcriptomic
landscape (Figure 2C). We then visualized the expression pattern of Chat in the context of 3D anatomical
space. Similar to the spatially distributed expression of PGP9.5 (Figure 1B), Chat expression was widely
distributed throughout the RAGP with no spatial gradients along any axis (Figure 2D).

We compared the transcriptomic proﬁles of the RAGP neurons with the molecular phenotypes identiﬁed
from single neuron transcriptomics analysis in the CNS (Hu et al., 2017). We used the available mouse
CNS data, due to lack of comparable pig CNS single neuron transcriptomic dataset. We reconstructed
the tSNE map of single neurons in the mouse CNS based on the 1,968 expression of the highly variable
genes (Hu et al., 2017) (Figure 2E). To compare how the neuronal phenotypes identiﬁed in the CNS
compared to those in the RAGP, we ﬁrst extracted genes contributing most to the variability in the
RAGP through principal component analysis (PCA). Of the 1,814 most variable genes in the RAGP, a subset
of 1,412 genes were found in the mouse CNS single neuron data (Hu et al., 2017). Visualization by tSNE map
shows that the well-deﬁned neuronal clusters based on variable genes in the CNS are largely lost when the
neuronal heterogeneity was analyzed using the 1,412 most variable genes in the RAGP (Figure 2E). These
results demonstrate that the speciﬁc gene markers that delineate the variability in the RAGP are not simi-
larly variable in the CNS, and vice versa, suggesting a different organization of neuronal heterogeneity be-
tween RAGP and CNS structures.

Considering that a large proportion of neurons showed expressions of Th and Chat (Figure 1D), we exam-
ined the co-expression patterns of these genes in the transcriptomics data. Neurons in the mouse (Hu et al.,
2017) and human CNS (Human Multiple Cortical Areas SMART-seq, 2019) show mutually exclusive expres-
sion of Th and Chat. In stark contrast to the lack of Th and Chat co-expression in the CNS, we found a high
degree of co-expression between Th and Chat in the RAGP neurons (Figure 2F). This ﬁnding further aug-
ments the results seen in the tSNE map (Figure 2E) suggesting that the neuronal molecular states within the
RAGP may be organized in a manner that is not similar to the neuronal phenotypes observed in the CNS.
We further compared these co-expression patterns against other available data in the peripheral nervous
system (PNS). Comparing expression of Th and Chat in different branches of the mouse PNS (Zeisel et al.,
2018), as well as in different cell phenotypes in sympathetic ganglia (Furlan et al., 2016), revealed patterns of
mutual exclusivity similar to those observed in the human and mouse CNS (Figure S1). These ﬁndings
further highlight the unique molecular architecture of the RAGP.

Landscape of neuronal transcriptional states in the pig RAGP

Using the 3D map of a representative RAGP, examination at the single-cell scale allowed us to visualize the
distribution of neurons within their 3D anatomical framework, revealing that neurons, while distributed

4

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

iScience
Article

ll

OPEN ACCESS

Figure 2. Transcriptomic landscape of pig RAGP from a single-cell scale RNAseq analysis

(A) Expression of 1,882 neuronally-enriched genes in 90 spatially-tracked neuronal clusters in RAGP based on single-cell
scale RNA-seq proﬁling of laser capture microdissected samples. The genes included in the heatmap were selected by
analyzing the GTEx database for those enriched in the neuronal tissues compared to other tissue types. Of the genes
identiﬁed as neuronally enriched in the GTEx database, 1,639 genes were present in the RAGP neurons.
(B) Distribution of select abundantly expressed neuronal genes.
(C) Transcriptomic landscape as delineated by tSNE indicating the gradient of Chat throughout a distributed cloud.
(D) Visualization within the 3D anatomical framework for a representative RAGP. The relative expression of choline
acetyltransferase (Chat) in these spatially-tracked neuronal samples is shown with reference to the axes of the 3D stack.
The bounding box on the lower panel shows 18.8 mm, 19.4 mm, and 16 mm on the x, y, and z axis, respectively.
(E) A comparison of the distribution of CNS neuronal types based on the most-variable genes in mouse CNS (Hu et al.,
2017) versus in pig RAGP (present data). The tSNE plots are colored based on 40 distinguishable mouse CNS neuronal
states described in Hu et al. (2017).
(F) Scatterplots comparing the expression of Th vs Chat in the pig RAGP (present data), mouse CNS (Hu et al., 2017), and
human CNS (Human Multiple Cortical Areas SMART-seq, 2019) (https://portal.brain-map.org/atlases-and-data/rnaseq/
human-multiple-cortical-areas-smart-seq).

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

5

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

Figure 3. Broad RAGP anatomy of SAN-projecting and non SAN-projecting neurons

(A) Visualization within the 3D anatomical framework of both SAN-projecting (blue) and non SAN-projecting (purple)
neurons that were comprehensively identiﬁed in select sections of a representative RAGP. Panels along the right side and
bottom show density plots representing the density of projecting and non-projecting neurons along each axis. The
bounding box on the lower panel shows 18.8 mm, 19.4 mm, and 16 mm on the x, y, and z axis, respectively.
(B) Anterior (top), angled (middle) and superior (bottom) views of a representative RAGP showing only the SAN-projecting
neurons (left) or non SAN-projecting neurons (right). The X, Y, Z measurements are consistent with those in panel (A).
(C) A select section of the RAGP (7,040 mm from the superior aspect) zooming in on three different neuron clusters
showing a high percentage of neurons within the cluster projecting to the SAN toward the SAN-proximal side of the RAGP
(1), a cluster with no SAN-projecting neurons toward the SAN-distal side of the RAGP (3) and a cluster with a mix of both
projecting and non-projecting neurons in between (2). Scale bars: 100 mm. Tissue measured 18.8 mm from left to right
(xaxis) and 19.4 mm top to bottom (yaxis). For an animated visualization see Video S1.

throughout the RAGP, are more densely packed closer to the endocardium (Figure 3A). Annotation of neu-
rons based on their projection to the SAN indicates that while both projecting and non-projecting neurons
are present throughout the RAGP, SAN-projecting neurons appear to be more concentrated closer to the
SAN and less concentrated toward the epicardium (Figures 3A–3C, Video S1). We assayed 405 spatially-
tracked single neuron samples from RAGP (n = 4 animals) for expression of 211 genes within each neuron
using HT-qPCR, representing both SAN-projecting and non SAN-projecting neurons (Figure S2A). At the
molecular level, a set of only 6 genes (Cck, Gal, Grp, Hcrtr1, Ntrk1, Ret) showed signiﬁcant differences in the
distribution of expression between SAN-projecting and non SAN-projecting neurons (K-S statistic, FDR-
adjusted p< 0.01, fold change >2, Figure S2B). Interestingly, expression of Cck, Gal, and Hcrtr1 have

6

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

iScience
Article

ll

OPEN ACCESS

recently been examined within the peripheral nervous system where expression of Hcrtr1 and Gal has been
shown in sympathetic neurons in the PNS while neuropeptides Cck and Gal have been shown in enteric
neurons (Zeisel et al., 2018). Meanwhile, Ret and Ntrk1 have proven crucial for differentiation of neuronal
subtypes in sympathetic ganglia (Furlan et al., 2016), although the signiﬁcance of their differential expres-
sion between SAN-projecting and non SAN-projecting neurons is still unclear. Comparing neurons across
all 4 RAGP, the expression distribution of select neuronal markers NeuN, PGP9.5, Chat, Th, Dbh, and Npy
were relatively consistent across animals and between SAN-projecting and non SAN-projecting neurons
(Figure S2C).

In order to identify gene expression modules that can better characterize the neurons based on the con-
nectivity to SAN, we used a combination of clustering and template matching. This robust approach mimics
algorithms such as k-means that seed certain clusters and map the data into the seeds taken from an un-
biased hierarchical clustering approach, yielding six transcriptional states within the RAGP neurons (Fig-
ure 4A). Brieﬂy, the gene expression proﬁles of SAN-projecting neurons from one male and one female
RAGP were subjected to hierarchical clustering to partition the single neurons into distinct states. These
states were used as templates to assign the remaining non SAN-projecting neurons to one of these states
based on correlation to the template, with neurons below the correlation threshold sequestered into an
additional state. Neurons from a different pair of male and female RAGP were sorted into these transcrip-
tional states based on correlation to the template proﬁle, revealing similar patterns (Figures 4A andS3).
Examination of these transcriptional states reveals that the molecular signatures of SAN-projecting and
non SAN-projecting neurons are remarkably similar. A closer examination uncovered a state consisting
of almost entirely SAN-projecting neurons (state C), and another state consisting of almost entirely non
SAN-projecting RAGP neurons (state F). Notably, neither of these states could be distinguished from
the other neuronal states by the patterns of any given gene expression module. Instead, each state was
characterized by a combinatorial pattern of multiple gene expression modules (Figure 4A). Visualization
using a tSNE map revealed that within the context of the transcriptional landscape, these neuronal states
are distributed across parts of a single cloud, suggesting a gradient-based organization of the neuronal
states (Figure 4B). Analysis of the potential patterns and gradients of these states within the 3D anatomical
framework of a representative RAGP revealed that the neuronal states were evenly distributed throughout
the RAGP (Figure 4C, Video S2).

We further explored the heterogeneity of gene expression distribution across these neuronal states (Fig-
ures 4D–4F, Figure S4A). State A is largely deﬁned by high expression of genes in module 2 which include
neuron-speciﬁc genes such as Map2, Eno2, and PGP9.5 as well as genes involved in neurotransmitter pro-
cesses such as Chat, Th, and Dbh (Figure 4D). States B and C were both characterized by high expression of
genes in modules 5 and 7, which include several adrenergic receptors and potassium channels (Figure 4E).
Several adrenergic receptors were expressed abundantly within RAGP neurons (Figure S5A). Interestingly,
the beta-adrenergic receptors, which are of particular importance to cardiac function (de Lucia et al., 2018),
appear to have a spatial localization trend within the RAGP (Figures S5B–S5D). Modules 4 and 6 delineate
the separation between states B and C where module 4 is characterized by high expression in states B and
D and includes a variety of receptor subtypes. Module 6, consisting of a variety of neuropeptides and neu-
ropeptide receptors, has a broader range of expression across all samples, with mixed expression in most
states but particularly high expression in state C. Genes in module 1 were upregulated in states D and F and
included neuropeptides such as Npff and Nppa as well as a voltage-gated potassium channel, Kcnip1 (Fig-
ure 4F). Examination of ion channels and glutamatergic and GABAergic receptors also show a range of
expression across the identiﬁed transcriptional states (Figures S4B and S4C).

Correlated cholinergic and catecholaminergic gene expression in RAGP neurons

Examination of genes involved in acetylcholine and catecholamine biosynthesis and transport processes
shows consistent expression across all RAGP and between SAN-projecting and non SAN-projecting neu-
rons and also reveal a surprising level of co-expression (Figures 5A, 5B, S2C, and S6A–S6D). A closer look at
the genes involved in the catecholamine biosynthesis showed that Th, the rate-limiting enzyme in the pro-
duction of all catecholamines, and Dbh, responsible for the conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine are
expressed over a wide range and show a high degree of coexpression (Figures 5B andS6B). Ddc, the
enzyme converting L-DOPA to dopamine, and Pnmt, responsible for the conversion of norepinephrine
to epinephrine, were both stably expressed in the majority of samples as seen by the high abundance
and narrow range of expression for both genes (Figure 5B). This further underscores the regulation of

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

7

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

Figure 4. Landscape of neuronal transcriptional states in the pig RAGP

(A) Expression of 174 genes, each assayed in 321 single neurons (n = 3 animals) through HT-qPCR, yielding six
transcriptional states using a combination of clustering and template matching analysis. A majority of the states consisted
of both SAN-projecting and non SAN-projecting neurons. Sample annotations at the top of the heatmap indicate
whether the single neurons were SAN-projecting or non SAN-projecting and indicate the distribution across animals.
A complete heatmap with 405 neurons from all 4 RAGP is shown in Figure S3.
(B) Landscape of neuronal transcriptional states visualized as a tSNE plot. Colors correspond to the states shown in
panel (A).
(C) Visualization of the neuronal states within the 3D anatomical framework for a representative RAGP. The bounding box
on the lower panel shows 18.8 mm, 19.4 mm, and 16 mm on the x, y, and z axis, respectively.
(D–F) Expression distribution of select genes with enrichment in speciﬁc transcriptional states: (D) state (A)Map2, Chat,
Th, Dbh; (E) states B and CAdrab2b, Adrb3, Kcnab1, Kcnc1; and (F) states D and FNpff and Kcnip1. Enrichment assessed
by a one-way ANOVA and post hoc Tukey Honest Signiﬁcant Difference test pvalue < 0.01.

catecholamine biosynthesis process at the level of Th and Dbh as the rate-limiting enzymatic steps whose
gene expression levels are highly variable across single neurons. Notably, Nos1 and Vip, both known to be
expressed in certain cholinergic neurons (Blottner and Baumgarten, 1992; Schotzinger et al., 1994) showed
no correlation of expression to Chat in the RAGP (Figures S7A and S7B). Expression of Vip and Nos1 was
detectable in nearly all the assayed neurons (Figures S7C and S7D). Additionally, Ret and Ntrk1, that
showed differential expression between SAN-projecting and non SAN-projecting RAGP neurons,
showed similar patterns of co-expression with the cholinergic and catecholaminergic markers (Figure S3,
Module 2).

8

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

iScience
Article

ll

OPEN ACCESS

Figure 5. Correlated cholinergic and catecholaminergic gene expression in RAGP neurons

(A) Transcriptional state-wise gene expression of the components of acetylcholine and catecholamine biosynthesis and
transport processes, across 405 single neurons assayed through HT-qPCR in RAGP.
(B) Beeswarm plot showing the abundance and the range of expression of key genes involved in catecholamine
biosynthesis across 405 single RAGP neurons from n = 4 animals.
(C) Visualization of Chat gene expression within the 3D anatomical framework for a representative RAGP. The bounding
box on the lower panel shows 18.8 mm, 19.4 mm, and 16 mm on the x, y, and z axis, respectively.
(D and E) The distributions of Chat and Th gene expression overlap within the transcriptional landscape as visualized in
the tSNE plots.
(cid:1)16). The
(F) Correlated gene expression of Chat and Th across single neurons in RAGP (R2 = 0.69, pvalue < 2.2 3 10
pairwise comparison of gene expression levels is shown for SAN-projecting and non SAN-projecting neurons (n = 4
animals). The points marked gray correspond to RAGP neurons without information on SAN projection, as these were
microdissected from a pig heart without a tracer injection into the SAN region.
(G–I) Confocal images showing a cluster of neurons within RAGP double stained for TH (G) and VAChT (H). Colocalization
of TH and VAChT in a subset of neurons (I).

Visualization of key genes such as Chat and Th within the 3D anatomical framework of a representative
RAGP revealed that their wide range of expression is distributed spatially throughout the RAGP (Figures
5C and S8A, Video S3). Visualization of the expression distribution of Chat and Th through a tSNE map
revealed distinct and overlapping gradients within the transcriptional landscape (Figures 5D and 5E).

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

9

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

Figure 6. Neuropeptidergic interaction networks in the pig RAGP

(A,C, and E) Expression patterns of somatostatin (A), galanin (C), and neuropeptide Y (E) and their cognate receptors
across 405 single RAGP neurons (n = 4 animals) assayed through HT-qPCR.
(B,D, and F) The transcriptional landscape across all RAGP colored for expression of the neuropeptides and their cognate
receptors. (G,H) Interaction networks of neuronal subtypes deﬁned based on the combinatorial pattern of neuropeptides
and their receptor expression.
(G) The interaction network subset corresponding to the neuronal subtypes producing the neuropeptides somatostatin
(Sst), galanin (Gal), and neuropeptide Y (Npy). The circular nodes denote the neuronal subtypes.The size of the node is
proportional to the number of single neurons belonging to each subtype. The pie chart within each circular node
indicates the proportion of the neurons within that subtype that are identiﬁed as projecting to the SAN region. The arrows
from the circular nodes denoting the neuronal subtypes connect to the square-shaped nodes denoting the three

10

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

Figure 6. Continued

neuropeptides, based on which subtypes show the corresponding neuropeptide gene expression above a speciﬁed
threshold. The color of the arrows matches the color of the corresponding target square-shaped node.
(H) The interaction network subset corresponding to the neuropeptide receptor expression across the neuronal subtypes.
The notation of circular and square-shaped nodes is the same as in pane (G). The arrows connect each neuropeptide to
the neuronal subtypes based on which subtypes express any the corresponding neuropeptide receptors above a
speciﬁed threshold. The color of the arrows corresponds to the color of the neuropeptide node.
(I) Combinatorial pattern of expression of a wide range of neuropeptides and receptors of neurotransmitters across single
neurons in RAGP (n = 4 animals).

Single-cell scale RNA-seq data suggested regional co-expression of Th and Chat (Figure 2F). Building on
these results, single neuron gene expression analysis showed that Chat and Th were highly correlated
across single neurons in the RAGP (Figure 5F). Interestingly, gene co-expression of these cholinergic
and catecholaminergic markers was in stark contrast to protein expression patterns that showed much
reduced overlap of expression between TH and VAChT, another cholinergic marker, in individual neurons
(Figure S6C). Immunohistochemistry for TH and VAChT revealed that a majority of neurons showed robust
protein expression of VAChT with a subset co-staining for TH (Figures 5G–5I). A more detailed quantitative
analysis of TH and VAChT protein co-expression are included in a complementary study (Hanna et al.,
2021). This ﬁnding suggests that post-transcriptional regulation plays a key role in shaping the neurotrans-
mitter patterns within RAGP. In particular, the high correlation between Th and Chat at the mRNA level sug-
gests that the RAGP neurons are poised to use both cholinergic and catecholaminergic processes, along
the lines of multipotential neuronal phenotypes observed in CNS (Park et al., 2014).

Neuropeptidergic interaction networks in the pig RAGP

We examined the co-expression patterns of neuropeptides and their cognate receptors to identify putative
local paracrine networks within RAGP. Identifying neuronal subsets based on co-expression patterns of a
neuropeptide with its receptors allows us to classify groups of neurons that exhibit autocrine or paracrine
signaling. We examined local paracrine networks for three important neuropeptides, Sst, Gal, and Npy, in
detail (Figures 6A–6F, S8B–S8D, and S9).

In the case of somatostatin and its receptors, Sstr1 and Sstr2, neurons cluster into six groups based on the
presence or absence of each gene (Figure 6A). This revealed one neuronal subset that expresses somato-
statin, but not its receptors, and therefore can transmit but not respond to the somatostatin signal in the
RAGP network. Meanwhile, two neuronal subsets were positive for somatostatin as well as either receptor
Sstr1 or Sstr2, representing groups that can both transmit and be activated by somatostatin.The remaining
three neuronal subsets do not synthesize but can respond to somatostatin (Figures S9A and S9D). Similar to
Sst, Gal and Npy and their cognate receptors each clustered into six neuronal subsets. When categorizing
each neuronal subset based on the presence or absence of each gene, however, the six neuronal subsets
were reduced to 5 categories for the Gal/Galr1/Galr2 set and 4 identiﬁers for the Npy/Npy1r/Npy2r set
(Figures 6C, 6E, S9B, S9C, S9E, and S9F).

Despite the strong patterns of expression seen within each individual network, none of the genes in either
the Sst/Sstr1/Sstr2 or Gal/Galr1/Galr2 set showed a discernible gradient across the broader transcriptomic
landscape (Figures 6B, 6D, and 6F). However, Npy (and not its receptors) showed a gradient of expression
that largely mirrored the Th and Chat gradients, consistent with the co-expression of these genes across
single neurons (Figure 6F). Taken together, the results indicate that while Sst, Gal, and Npy each have
distinct co-expression patterns that outline local paracrine networks, the signaling of any one neuropep-
tide alone is unlikely to be the main driver of transcriptional states of RAGP neurons.

Integrating all three paracrine networks at once revealed that the overall combination is more complex
than any individual neuropeptide driven network (Figures 6G, 6H, and S9). Each neuron was categorized
as neuropeptide +ve or neuropeptide -ve, receptor +ve or receptor -ve, based on whether the gene
expression of the given peptide/receptor was above the median expression value for that gene across
all the neurons. Applying such a categorization to the 405 laser capture microdissected RAGP neurons re-
sulted in 61 distinct neuronal categories (out of a possible set of 64), indicating a combinatorial network of
neuropeptide signaling (Data S1). Of these 61 categorized neuronal states, a set of 12 states consisted of
more than 10 sampled neurons each, representing a total of 224 out of the 405 single neurons (about 55%).
A network representation of these 12 neuronal subsets highlighted the putative autocrine and paracrine

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

11

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

network of neuropeptide signaling between RAGP neurons (Figures 6G and 6H). The conceptual frame-
work outlined by this paracrine network of neuromodulatory factors offers insight into different approaches
for pharmacological interventions in cardiovascular disease. Additionally, visualization of these individual
networks within their 3D anatomical framework also suggests the potential for widespread signaling
throughout the RAGP and enables a much more selective and speciﬁc study of the physiological involve-
ment of these neuronal clusters (Figures S8B–S8E, Video S4). Further expanding the network analysis to
include all assayed neuropeptides and receptors revealed a combinatorial mosaic of neuropeptide/recep-
tor expression (Figure 6I), indicating a complex local neuromodulatory network within RAGP.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we performed a combination of spatially-tracked single-cell transcriptomic analysis of an
intrinsic cardiac ganglion. Our results uncovered the complex molecular landscape and paracrine networks
of RAGP neurons in the pig heart. RNA-seq analysis revealed that the composition of RAGP neurons is
distinct from that of neuronal subtypes in the CNS, with minimal overlap in the combinatorial expression
patterns of neuronally enriched genes. Using HT-qPCR of hundreds of single RAGP neurons, we identiﬁed
neuronal transcriptional states with distinct gradients across the transcriptomic landscape. A remarkable
ﬁnding was a high prevalence of coexpression of cholinergic and catecholaminergic neuronal markers
Chat and Th in a large fraction of the RAGP neurons, contrary to immunohistochemistry data showing
only minimal coexpression, suggesting multipotential phenotypes. The gene expression proﬁles of
SAN-projecting RAGP neurons were distributed across multiple neuronal states without a single gene or
gene expression module serving as an exclusive marker of RAGP neuronal connectivity to the SAN region.
Our integrative analysis revealed complex expression patterns of neuropeptide signaling indicating that
any individual neuropeptidergic system is unlikely to act as the main driver of neuronal transcriptional
states. Neuromodulation of vagal activity to regulate cardiac function is an active and growing research
area with much potential for transforming clinical care in heart disease. The single neuron transcriptomic
landscape and paracrine networks uncovered in this study form the foundation for developing new neuro-
modulatory targets for improving heart health.

In recent years, the single-cell RNA-Seq studies of neurons isolated from various CNS components show
distinct separations along the transcriptomic landscapes with individual clusters speciﬁcally linked to excit-
atory or inhibitory processes (Chen et al., 2019; Darmanis et al., 2015; Hu et al., 2017; Kupari et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2020). Given the complex neural networks to and from the CNS that inﬂuence the ICNS, we compared
our RNA-Seq data with RNA-Seq data from single CNS and PNS neurons to compare cell types across cen-
tral and peripheral neurons.

Interestingly, our data showed little to no alignment with the cell populations identiﬁed in CNS neurons. In
contrast with CNS neurons which cluster distinctly into dedicated phenotypes, neurons of the RAGP
resemble mixed neuronal types with a gradient of expression as represented by a single cloud across
the transcriptomic landscape (Figures 2C and 4B) (Hu et al., 2017; Kupari et al., 2019). These results suggest
that comparing RAGP to CNS neuronal types is not akin to comparing the variability of neural phenotypes
in a single brain nucleus to the CNS as a whole. While transcriptomics and proteomics with 3D anatomical
location tracking have been established for the brain (Allen Brain Atlas) (Goel et al., 2014; Hawrylycz et al.,
2012; Roth et al., 2006; Shen et al., 2012), to our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst group to attempt this at the
mammalian heart (Achanta et al., 2020). This work enabled creation of a 3D model of pig RAGP that pre-
cisely integrates molecular data of single neurons into the 3D anatomical framework. Unlike the CNS,
where molecular proﬁles correspond to speciﬁc anatomically located nuclei, we have found no discernable
connection between the molecular proﬁles and anatomical locations within the RAGP (Goel et al., 2014;
Hawrylycz et al., 2012; Roth et al., 2006; Shen et al., 2012). This suggests that the physiological functions
attributed to the ICNS are likely to not be restricted to a particular anatomical location within any gangli-
onic plexus, and that the RAGP, and possibly other ganglionic plexuses in the ICNS, is composed of a com-
bination of neuronal types whose integrative control of the heart enables the complex response patterns
observed in physiological studies (Hamon et al., 2017).

Available physiological data suggest the notion that RAGP may consist of 80% locally connecting neurons,
with the remainder distributed between those receiving afferent and motor input (both parasympathetic
and sympathetic) (Ardell et al., 2015; Armour, 2008; Hoard et al., 2008; Hopkins and Armour, 1984; Kawa-
shima, 2005; Neel and Parsons, 1986). Our results showed that the underlying transcriptomically-deﬁned

12

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

iScience
Article

ll

OPEN ACCESS

molecular states of neurons in RAGP are not necessarily aligned with the phenotypic categories postulated
by physiological ﬁndings. We identiﬁed six transcriptional states of RAGP neurons that are distinguished by
combinatorial patterns of gene expression modules that span several neuronal functions/phenotype cat-
egories, including cholinergic, adrenergic, neurotransmitter, receptor expressions and ion channels. No
state was exclusively represented by individual gene expression modules or a subset of the genes. Such
combinatorial patterning of neuronal states was present similarly in SAN-projecting and non SAN-projec-
ting neurons. Analysis of 3D spatial location of connectivity-based (SAN projecting, non SAN-projecting)
and transcriptional state-based neuronal groups showed a heterogeneous distribution across the anatom-
ical and transcriptional landscape of the RAGP. Our results on the combinatorially organized gene expres-
sion modules deﬁning the spatially distributed RAGP neuronal states can serve to explain the variability of
physiological responses observed in experimental disruption of ICNS circuits (Berger et al., 2019; Driessen
et al., 2016; Qin et al., 2017).

Distinct neuron types that are sympathetic or parasympathetic have been identiﬁed in the ICNS in various
immuno-histochemical studies for ChAT and TH to identify cholinergic or adrenergic phenotypes, respec-
tively (Hoard et al., 2008; Hoover et al., 2009; Horackova et al., 2000; Richardson et al., 2003; Rysevaite et al.,
2011), where the majority have found the neurons to be either parasympathetic or sympathetic in nature.
However, some have found that ICNS neurons are not exclusively parasympathetic or sympathetic, with re-
ports showing 10-20% of the cardiac GP co-expressing both ChAT and TH (Rysevaite et al., 2011; Zarzoso
et al., 2013).

One of the more signiﬁcant ﬁndings of this study is the co-expression of cholinergic and catecholaminergic
pathway genes in our data (Figure 5). To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study to report co-expression of
both Chat and Th in the RAGP, with 90–95% of neurons showing detectable expression of both genes,
and 76% of neurons showing abundant expression of both genes at the single-cell transcriptional level (Fig-
ures 5A–5H). Of note, the ICNS is comprised of two neuronal types, large principle neurons (PNs) and small
intensely ﬂuorescent (sif) cells, the latter of which contain a wide range of neurotransmitters and are often
more likely to express adrenergic phenotypes (Hall and Landis, 1991; Rysevaite et al., 2011; Wake and
Brack, 2016). Based on neuron size and through the use of LCM, we speciﬁcally targeted our single-cell
sampling to PNs (Figure 3C). While it is possible that some sif cells were collected along with the PNs,
we believe that the data and therefore the coexpression patterns between Chat and Th can be attributed
mainly to the PNs in the RAGP. Testing the protein level expression of these enzymes in the RAGP showed
consistent results with previous studies in the ICNS. Confocal microscopy studies of RAGP showed that 99%
neurons were VAChT positive and 10-20% neurons were also positive for TH (Figures 5G–5I). We interpret
these differences between gene and protein expression levels as representative of multipotential pheno-
types that are observed at the transcriptional scale that are then shaped further post-transcriptionally to
yield a speciﬁc distribution in a given physiological context.

Further evidence of post-transcriptional modiﬁcations is the strong co-expression patterns between Chat,
Th, and genes known to differentiate between neuronal subtypes such as Ret and Ntrk1 in other sympa-
thetic ganglia (Furlan et al., 2016). Ret and Ntrk1 encode for neurotrophic factor receptors that bind
glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and nerve growth factor (NGF), respectively. Interestingly, previ-
ous experiments have shown that cardiac neurons are immunoreactive for TrkA (encoded by Ntrk1) regard-
less of whether or not they are immunoreactive for TH (Hoard et al., 2008). We and others have shown that
cells retain their plasticity beyond development and are able to adapt to perturbation based on the inputs
they receive in normal and diseased states by transcriptional, as well as post-transcriptional regulation
(Dulcis et al., 2013; Park et al., 2014). For example, we have previously shown that TH immunoreactive neu-
rons in the brainstem are organized along a gradient of catecholaminergic (Th+/Fos-) and non-catechol-
aminergic (Th-/Fos+) neuronal states (Park et al., 2014), and this gradient shifts in response to physiological
perturbation such as sustained hypertension. Our results on correlation of Th and Chat raise an intriguing
possibility of such plastic adaptive dynamics within the RAGP, with functional effects on vagal control of
cardiac function.

We delved into three peptidergic systems, Gal, Sst, and Npy, which displayed distinctive coexpression pat-
terns with their respective receptors. These neuromodulators have been shown to have important effects
on cardiac function and vagal tone (Beal and Martin, 1986; Gorky and Schwaber, 2019; Habecker et al.,
2016; Herring and Paterson, 2009; Herring et al., 2012; Ho¨ kfelt et al., 1977; Moriarty et al., 1992; Smith-White

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

13

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

et al., 2003). High concentrations of Sst have been found in cardiac tissues, speciﬁcally in the right atrium
and the atrioventricular node, where specialized conducting and pacemaker cells are found (Day et al.,
1985). Sst is found mostly in GABAergic neurons and mediates antagonism of sympathetic processes on
a broad scale as well as promotes parasympathetic effects, speciﬁcally reducing cardiac contractility in
an Ach-dependent manner (Gorky and Schwaber, 2019). Meanwhile both Gal and Npy have been identiﬁed
as co-transmitters in adrenergic neurons and have been shown to work in similar and complementary man-
ners with respect to vagal control (Herring et al., 2012). While Gal has been shown to attenuate cardiac
vagal activity with no effect on blood pressure, Npy does just the opposite, increasing blood pressure
but having no inhibitory effects on vagal activity (Smith-White et al., 2003). Studies have shown that Gal
and Npy released from sympathetic neurons inhibit the release of acetylcholine in the cardiac cholinergic
postsynaptic neurons (Habecker et al., 2005). Our results on the expression of Sst, Gal, and Npy in the RAGP
neurons suggest a strong likelihood of these neuromodulatory interactions arising from within the RAGP
paracrine networks to mediate parasympathetic and sympathetic control of cardiac function. This data is
largely consistent with our previous ﬁndings in the rat heart that also show a wide range of expression
and combinatorial patterns between peptides and their cognate receptors (Achanta et al., 2020). We exam-
ined each of these peptidergic networks separately and in combination with one another in the larger
context of the neuronal network. While examination of one neuropeptide-receptor set at a time reveals
discrete and overlapping co-expression patterns, these gradients are absent from the broader transcrip-
tomic landscape, further underscoring that examination of one peptidergic network is insufﬁcient to
gain an understanding of the network as a whole. Combination of the three peptidergic networks yielded
a wide range of combinatorial gene expression patterns and reveals a widespread signaling network where
almost all sampled neurons are capable of being activated by one or more neuropeptides. Notably, Gal
and Npy, which have been shown to be released together in sympathetic neurons of the stellate ganglia
(Habecker et al., 2005), showed partly overlapping gene expression patterns across RAGP neurons, sug-
gesting distinctive adaptive and neuromodulatory phenotypes in the RAGP versus elsewhere.

Expanding the network analysis to account for the wide range of neuropeptide systems expressed within
RAGP suggests a conceptual formulation of RAGP as a highly adaptive and dynamic system driven by
combinatorial patterns of neuromodulators acting in local paracrine networks. The dynamicism observed
in these paracrine networks along with the level of correlation between cholinergic and catecholamin-
ergic markers underscores the distinct composition of the ICN in comparison with the central nervous
system and other studied ganglia (Furlan et al., 2016; Hu et al., 2017; Zeisel et al., 2018). This study
lays the groundwork for future studies to further illuminate how the unique organization of the ICN is
crucial to the pacemaking activities of the SAN and cardiac function. The neural network of the ICN is
aptly referred to as the ‘‘little brain’’ with its high level of complexity and large percentage of LCNs
that are capable of remodeling upon cardiac disease and injury (Armour, 2008; Rajendran et al., 2016).
We speculate that the complexity and variability associated with such a wide range of cardiac functions
may simply require more precise and dynamic control than other autonomic ganglia. The wide diversity
of potential transmitters may therefore be necessary in order to meet the needs resulting from such a
diversity of functions (Habecker et al., 2016).

Our data demonstrates that the local cardiac ganglia harbor anatomical and molecular features necessary
to function as complex signal processing units that critically mediate vagal control of heart function and
health. These conceptual advances provide the necessary anatomical and molecular foundation for new
functional and translational research. In addition, our study provides the data needed to begin a modeling
effort focused on neuroanatomical and electrophysiological properties of the intrinsic cardiac neurons.
Integrating these ﬁndings with other data obtained from our collaborative SPARC consortium will enable
development of computational models of neurons and networks in the RAGP as a critical mediator of vagal
control of the heart (Hanna et al., 2021). With the RAGP as a starting point, the RAGP network model can be
further expanded into a systems model of autonomic control of cardiovascular function to test novel con-
trol strategies for neuromodulation and to open the door to more effective therapeutics.

Limitations of the study

(cid:3) A FastBlue retrograde tracer was injected into the SA-node of the pig to label SAN-projecting neu-
rons in the RAGP. It is possible that there was incomplete penetration of the tracer and that some
neurons identiﬁed as non SAN-projecting due to lack of FastBlue signal indeed project to the SA-
node.

14

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

iScience
Article

ll

OPEN ACCESS

(cid:3) The present ﬁndings are true for one species, the Yucatan minipig, and it should be investigated how

these results are represented across species, particularly in humans

(cid:3) The relative homogeneity of the transcriptional data throughout the RAGP suggests that different
cardiac regulatory functions may not be localized to distinct subpopulations but are rather distrib-
uted throughout, which should be further investigated. If this is true, it may be that there is local co-
ordination for the regulation of different cardiac functions and regions that are integrated specif-
ically in different populations of the ICN.

(cid:3) The present study investigates the healthy animal, and while there are implications for disease, the

exact manifestations of these networks in the disease state remain to be explored.

STAR+METHODS

Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following:

d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

B Lead contact
B Material availability
B Data and code availability

d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
d METHOD DETAILS

B Optimization of neural tracers for laser capture microdissection
B Neural tracing experiments
B Porcine tissue collection
B Cryosectioning and staining
B Laser capture microdissection
B Mapping LCM samples onto the reconstructed 3D stack
B RNASeq library preparation
B Single cell RNA-seq data analysis
B Extraction of signiﬁcant genes from GTEx
B Identiﬁcation of highly variable genes using PCA
B High-throughput real-time PCR
B HT-qPCR data analysis
B Determination of abundant/detectable expression
B Clustering and template matching to identify transcriptional states
B Plots for showing abundance and range of gene expression in Ct space
B Paracrine network analysis
B Confocal staining and visualization

d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102713.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Financial support for this work was provided by the National Institutes of Health under the Stimulating Pe-
ripheral Activity to Relieve Conditions (SPARC) program, Grant OT2 OD023848 (PI: K.S.), OT2 OD030534
(PI: R.V.) and NHLBI Grant U01 HL133360 to J.S.S. and R.V. The authors thank Ms. Maci Heal for preparing
the supplemental videos. The authors thank Dr. Anita Bandrowski for evaluating the manuscript through
the SciScore(cid:2) tool to check for adherence to the Structure, Transparency, Accessibility and Reporting
criteria and for supplying the RRIDs for relevant resources used in the study.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

K.S., J.S., R.V. conceived, designed, and supervised this work. S.R., S.A., S.T., and S.N. obtained and pro-
cessed neuronal samples. P.H. and J.L.A. performed the neural tracing and tissue harvesting. A.M., S.A.,
and L.K. processed transcriptomic data for analysis. A.M. and S.A. analyzed HT-qPCR data. A.M. analyzed
RNAseq data and external datasets. E.H.S. contributed to the acquisition, analysis and interpretation of

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

15

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

immunohistochemical studies and drafting of the work. D.B.H. contributed to the conception of the work
and analysis of immunohistochemical studies and drafting of the manuscript. A.M. and S.A. wrote and edi-
ted the manuscript with assistance from R.V. and J.S. A.M. and S.R. performed data visualizations and ﬁgure
formulations. S.R. mapped all anatomy and neurons in 3D stacks.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

Competing interests: University of California, Los Angeles has patents developed by KS and JLA relating to
cardiac neural diagnostics and therapeutics. KS and JLA are co-founders of NeuCures, Inc. All the remain-
ing authors declare no competing interests.

Received: March 8, 2021
Revised: May 12, 2021
Accepted: June 8, 2021
Published: July 19, 2021

REFERENCES

Achanta, S., Gorky, J., Leung, C., Moss, A.,
Robbins, S., Eisenman, L., Chen, J., Tappan, S.,
Heal, M., Farahani, N., et al. (2020). A
comprehensive integrated anatomical and
molecular atlas of rat intrinsic cardiac nervous
system. iScience 23, 101140. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.isci.2020.101140.

Ardell, J.L., Rajendran, P.S., Nier, H.A.,
KenKnight, B.H., and Armour, J.A. (2015). Central-
peripheral neural network interactions evoked by
vagus nerve stimulation: functional
consequences on control of cardiac function. Am.
J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 309, H1740–H1752.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00557.2015.

Armour, J.A. (2008). Potential clinical relevance of
the ‘‘little brain’’ on the mammalian heart. Exp.
Physiol. 93, 165–176. https://doi.org/10.1113/
expphysiol.2007.041178.

Bacher, R., Chu, L.-F., Leng, N., Gasch, A.P.,
Thomson, J.A., Stewart, R.M., Newton, M., and
Kendziorski, C. (2017). SCnorm: robust
normalization of single-cell RNA-seq data. Nat.
Methods 14, 584–586. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nmeth.4263.

Beal, M.F., and Martin, J.B. (1986).
Neuropeptides in neurological disease. Ann.
Neurol. 20, 547–565. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ana.410200502.

Berger, W.R., Neefs, J., van den Berg, N.W.E.,
Krul, S.P.J., van Praag, E.M., Piersma, F.R., de
Jong, J.S.S.G., van Boven, W.-J.P., Driessen,
A.H.G., and de Groot, J.R. (2019). Additional
ganglion plexus ablation during thoracoscopic
surgical ablation of advanced atrial ﬁbrillation:
Intermediate follow-up of the AFACT study.
JACC Clin.Electrophysiol. 5, 343–353. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jacep.2018.10.008.

Blottner, D., and Baumgarten, H.G. (1992). Nitric
oxide synthetase (NOS)-containing
sympathoadrenal cholinergic neurons of the rat
IML-cell column: evidence from histochemistry,
immunohistochemistry, and retrograde labeling.
J. Comp. Neurol. 316, 45–55. https://doi.org/10.
1002/cne.903160105.

Bouman, L.N., Gerlings, E.D., Biersteker, P.A.,
and Bonke, F.I. (1968). Pacemaker shift in the sino-
atrial node during vagal stimulation. Pﬂugers

16

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

Arch. 302, 255–267. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00586730.

Butler, C.K., Smith, F.M., Cardinal, R., Murphy,
D.A., Hopkins, D.A., and Armour, J.A. (1990).
Cardiac responses to electrical stimulation of
discrete loci in canine atrial and ventricular
ganglionated plexi. Am. J. Physiol. 259, H1365–
H1373. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1990.
259.5.H1365.

Carlson, M.D., Geha, A.S., Hsu, J., Martin, P.J.,
Levy, M.N., Jacobs, G., and Waldo, A.L. (1992).
Selective stimulation of parasympathetic nerve
ﬁbers to the human sinoatrial node. Circulation
85, 1311–1317. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.85.
4.1311.

Chen, D., Zhu, J., Zhong, J., Chen, F., Lin, X., Dai,
J., Chen, Y., Wang, S., Ding, X., Wang, H., et al.
(2019). Single cell atlas of domestic pig brain
illuminates the conservation and divergence of
cell types at spatial and species levels. BioRxiv.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.872721.

Darmanis, S., Sloan, S.A., Zhang, Y., Enge, M.,
Caneda, C., Shuer, L.M., Hayden Gephart, M.G.,
Barres, B.A., and Quake, S.R. (2015). A survey of
human brain transcriptome diversity at the single
cell level. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 112, 7285–
7290. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1507125112.

Day, S.M., Gu, J., Polak, J.M., and Bloom, S.R.
(1985). Somatostatin in the human heart and
comparison with Guinea pig and rat heart. Br.
Heart J. 53, 153–157.

de Lucia, C., Eguchi, A., and Koch, W.J. (2018).
New insights in cardiac b-adrenergic signaling
during heart failure and aging. Front. Pharmacol.
9, 904. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2018.00904.

Dobin, A., Davis, C.A., Schlesinger, F., Drenkow,
J., Zaleski, C., Jha, S., Batut, P., Chaisson, M., and
Gingeras, T.R. (2013). STAR: ultrafast universal
RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635.

Driessen, A.H.G., Berger, W.R., Krul, S.P.J., van
den Berg, N.W.E., Neefs, J., Piersma, F.R., Chan
Pin Yin, D.R.P.P., de Jong, J.S.S.G., van Boven,
W.P., and de Groot, J.R. (2016). Ganglion plexus
ablation in advanced atrial ﬁbrillation: the AFACT
study. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 68, 1155–1165. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2016.06.036.

Dulcis, D., Jamshidi, P., Leutgeb, S., and Spitzer,
N.C. (2013). Neurotransmitter switching in the
adult brain regulates behavior. Science 340,
449–453. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
1234152.

Foley, J.W., Zhu, C., Jolivet, P., Zhu, S.X., Lu, P.,
Meaney, M.J., and West, R.B. (2019). Gene
expression proﬁling of single cells from archival
tissue with laser-capture microdissection and
Smart-3SEQ. Genome Res. 29, 1816–1825.
https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.234807.118.

Furlan, A., La Manno, G., Lu¨ bke, M., Ha¨ ring, M.,
Abdo, H., Hochgerner, H., Kupari, J., Usoskin, D.,
Airaksinen, M.S., Oliver, G., et al. (2016). Visceral
motor neuron diversity delineates a cellular basis
for nipple- and pilo-erection muscle control. Nat.
Neurosci. 19, 1331–1340. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nn.4376.

Furukawa, Y., Wallick, D.W., Martin, P.J., and
Levy, M.N. (1990). Chronotropic and dromotropic
responses to stimulation of intracardiac
sympathetic nerves to sinoatrial or
atrioventricular nodal region in anesthetized
dogs. Circ. Res. 66, 1391–1399. https://doi.org/
10.1161/01.res.66.5.1391.

Geis, W.P., Kaye, M.P., and Randall, W.C. (1973).
Major autonomic pathways to the atria and S-A
and A-V nodes of the canine heart. Am. J. Physiol.
224, 202–208. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplegacy.
1973.224.1.202.

Goel, P., Kuceyeski, A., LoCastro, E., and Raj, A.
(2014). Spatial patterns of genome-wide
expression proﬁles reﬂect anatomic and ﬁber
connectivity architecture of healthy human brain.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 35, 4204–4218. https://doi.
org/10.1002/hbm.22471.

Gorky, J., and Schwaber, J. (2019).
Conceptualization of a parasympathetic
endocrine system. Front. Neurosci. 13, 1008.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2019.01008.

GTEx Consortium (2013). The Genotype-tissue
expression (GTEx) project. Nat. Genet. 45,
580–585. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2653.

Gusel’nikova, V.V., and Korzhevskiy, D.E. (2015).
Neun as a neuronal nuclear antigen and neuron
differentiation marker. Acta Naturae 7, 42–47.

iScience
Article

Habecker, B.A., Anderson, M.E., Birren, S.J.,
Fukuda, K., Herring, N., Hoover, D.B., Kanazawa,
H., Paterson, D.J., and Ripplinger, C.M. (2016).
Molecular and cellular neurocardiology:
development, and cellular and molecular
adaptations to heart disease. J. Physiol. (Lond)
594, 3853–3875. https://doi.org/10.1113/
JP271840.

Habecker, B.A., Gritman, K.R., Willison, B.D., and
Van Winkle, D.M. (2005). Myocardial infarction
stimulates galanin expression in cardiac
sympathetic neurons. Neuropeptides 39, 89–95.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.npep.2004.11.003.

Hall, A.K., and Landis, S.C. (1991). Principal
neurons and small intensely ﬂuorescent (SIF) cells
in the rat superior cervical ganglion have distinct
developmental histories. J. Neurosci. 11,
472–484.

Hamon, D., Rajendran, P.S., Chui, R.W., Ajijola,
O.A., Irie, T., Talebi, R., Salavatian, S., Vaseghi,
M., Bradﬁeld, J.S., Armour, J.A., et al. (2017).
Premature ventricular contraction coupling
interval variability destabilizes cardiac neuronal
and electrophysiological control: insights from
simultaneous cardioneural mapping. Circ.
Arrhythm. Electrophysiol. 10. https://doi.org/10.
1161/CIRCEP.116.004937.

Hanna, P., Dacey, M.J., Brennan, J., Moss, A.,
Robbins, S., Achanta, S., Biscola, N.P., Swid, M.A.,
Rajendran, P.S., Mori, S., et al. (2021). Innervation
and neuronal control of the mammalian sinoatrial
node: a comprehensive atlas. Circ. Res. https://
doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.318458.

Hawrylycz, M.J., Lein, E.S., Guillozet-Bongaarts,
A.L., Shen, E.H., Ng, L., Miller, J.A., van de
Lagemaat, L.N., Smith, K.A., Ebbert, A., Riley,
Z.L., et al. (2012). An anatomically comprehensive
atlas of the adult human brain transcriptome.
Nature 489, 391–399. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature11405.

Herring, N., Cranley, J., Lokale, M.N., Li, D.,
Shanks, J., Alston, E.N., Girard, B.M., Carter, E.,
Parsons, R.L., Habecker, B.A., and Paterson, D.J.
(2012). The cardiac sympathetic co-transmitter
galanin reduces acetylcholine release and vagal
bradycardia: implications for neural control of
cardiac excitability. J. Mol. Cell.Cardiol. 52,
667–676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.
11.016.

Herring, N., and Paterson, D.J. (2009).
Neuromodulators of peripheral cardiac
sympatho-vagal balance. Exp. Physiol. 94, 46–53.
https://doi.org/10.1113/expphysiol.2008.044776.

Herring, N. (2015). Autonomic control of the
heart: going beyond the classical
neurotransmitters. Exp. Physiol. 100, 354–358.
https://doi.org/10.1113/expphysiol.2014.080184.

Hoard, J.L., Hoover, D.B., Mabe, A.M., Blakely,
R.D., Feng, N., and Paolocci, N. (2008).
Cholinergic neurons of mouse intrinsic cardiac
ganglia contain noradrenergic enzymes,
norepinephrine transporters, and the
neurotrophin receptors tropomyosin-related
kinase A and p75. Neuroscience 156, 129–142.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.06.
063.

ll

OPEN ACCESS

Am. J. Physiol.Cell Physiol 293, C1875–C1883.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00113.2007.

Genome Biol. 15, 550. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13059-014-0550-8.

Ho¨ kfelt, T., Elfvin, L.G., Elde, R., Schultzberg, M.,
Goldstein, M., and Luft, R. (1977). Occurrence of
somatostatin-like immunoreactivity in some
peripheral sympathetic noradrenergic neurons.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 74, 3587–3591. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.74.8.3587.

Hoover, D.B., Isaacs, E.R., Jacques, F., Hoard,
J.L., Page´ , P., and Armour, J.A. (2009).
Localization of multiple neurotransmitters in
surgically derived specimens of human atrial
ganglia. Neuroscience 164, 1170–1179. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.09.001.

Hopkins, D.A., and Armour, J.A. (1984).
Localization of sympathetic postganglionic and
parasympathetic preganglionic neurons which
innervate different regions of the dog heart.
J. Comp. Neurol. 229, 186–198. https://doi.org/
10.1002/cne.902290205.

Horackova, M., Slavikova, J., and Byczko, Z.
(2000). Postnatal development of the rat intrinsic
cardiac nervous system: a confocal laser scanning
microscopy study in whole-mount atria. Tissue
Cell 32, 377–388. https://doi.org/10.1054/tice.
2000.0126.

Human Multiple Cortical Areas SMART-seq.
(2019–). Human Multiple Cortical Areas SMART-
seq. https://portal.brain-map.org/atlases-and-
data/rnaseq/human-multiple-cortical-areas-
smart-seq.

Hu, P., Fabyanic, E., Kwon, D.Y., Tang, S., Zhou,
Z., and Wu, H. (2017). Dissecting cell-type
composition and activity-dependent
transcriptional state in mammalian brains by
massively parallel single-nucleus RNA-seq. Mol.
Cell 68, 1006–1015.e7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molcel.2017.11.017.

Kaestner, C.L., Smith, E.H., Peirce, S.G., and
Hoover, D.B. (2019). Immunohistochemical
analysis of the mouse celiac ganglion: an
integrative relay station of the peripheral nervous
system. J. Comp. Neurol. 527, 2742–2760. https://
doi.org/10.1002/cne.24705.

Kawashima, T. (2005). The autonomic nervous
system of the human heart with special reference
to its origin, course, and peripheral distribution.
Anat. Embryol. 209, 425–438. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00429-005-0462-1.

Kupari, J., Ha¨ ring, M., Agirre, E., Castelo-Branco,
G., and Ernfors, P. (2019). An atlas of vagal
sensory neurons and their molecular
specialization. Cell Rep 27, 2508–2523.e4. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.04.096.

Liao, Y., Smyth, G.K., and Shi, W. (2019). The R
package Rsubread is easier, faster, cheaper and
better for alignment and quantiﬁcation of RNA
sequencing reads. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, e47.
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz114.

Li, Y., Preissl, S., Hou, X., Zhang, Z., Zhang, K.,
Fang, R., Qiu, Y., Poirion, O., Li, B., Yan, Y., et al.
(2020). An atlas of gene regulatory elements in
adult mouse cerebrum. BioRxiv. https://doi.org/
10.1101/2020.05.10.087585.

Maaten, L.van der, and Hinton, G. (2008).
Visualizing Data using t-SNE. J. Machine
Learn.Res. 9, 2579–2605.

McGuirt, A.S., Schmacht, D.C., and Ardell, J.L.
(1997). Autonomic interactions for control of atrial
rate are maintained after SA nodal
parasympathectomy. Am. J. Physiol. 272, H2525–
H2533. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1997.
272.6.H2525.

Moriarty, M., Gibbins, I.L., Potter, E.K., and
McCloskey, D.I. (1992). Comparison of the
inhibitory roles of neuropeptide Y and galanin on
cardiac vagal action in the dog. Neurosci.Lett.
139, 275–279. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-
3940(92)90570-w.

Neel, D.S., and Parsons, R.L. (1986). Anatomical
evidence for the interaction of sympathetic and
parasympathetic neurons in the cardiac ganglion
of Necturus. J. Auton. Nerv. Syst. 15, 297–308.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-1838(86)90016-0.

Park, J., Brureau, A., Kernan, K., Starks, A., Gulati,
S., Ogunnaike, B., Schwaber, J., and Vadigepalli,
R. (2014). Inputs drive cell phenotype variability.
Genome Res. 24, 930–941. https://doi.org/10.
1101/gr.161802.113.

Park, J., Zhu, H., O’Sullivan, S., Ogunnaike, B.A.,
Weaver, D.R., Schwaber, J.S., and Vadigepalli, R.
(2016). Single-cell transcriptional analysis reveals
novel neuronal phenotypes and interaction
networks involved in the central circadian clock.
Front. Neurosci. 10, 481. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnins.2016.00481.

Parsons, R.L., Neel, D.S., McKeon, T.W., and
Carraway, R.E. (1987). Organization of a
vertebrate cardiac ganglion: a correlated
biochemical and histochemical study.
J. Neurosci. 7, 837–846.

Qin, M., Zhang, Y., Liu, X., Jiang, W.-F., Wu, S.-H.,
and Po, S. (2017). Atrial ganglionated plexus
modiﬁcation. JACC: Clin.Electrophysiol. 3,
950–959. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacep.2017.01.
022.

Rajendran, P.S., Nakamura, K., Ajijola, O.A.,
Vaseghi, M., Armour, J.A., Ardell, J.L., and
Shivkumar, K. (2016). Myocardial infarction
induces structural and functional remodelling of
the intrinsic cardiac nervous system. J. Physiol.
(Lond) 594, 321–341. https://doi.org/10.1113/
JP271165.

Randall, W.C., and Ardell, J.L. (1985). Selective
parasympathectomy of automatic and conductile
tissues of the canine heart. Am. J. Physiol. 248,
H61–H68. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1985.
248.1.H61.

Richardson, R.J., Grkovic, I., and Anderson, C.R.
(2003). Immunohistochemical analysis of
intracardiac ganglia of the rat heart. Cell Tissue
Res 314, 337–350. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00441-003-0805-2.

Roth, R.B., Hevezi, P., Lee, J., Willhite, D.,
Lechner, S.M., Foster, A.C., and Zlotnik, A. (2006).
Gene expression analyses reveal molecular
relationships among 20 regions of the human
CNS. Neurogenetics 7, 67–80. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10048-006-0032-6.

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

17

Hoard, J.L., Hoover, D.B., and Wondergem, R.
(2007). Phenotypic properties of adult mouse
intrinsic cardiac neurons maintained in culture.

Love, M.I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014).
Moderated estimation of fold change and
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2.

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

Rysevaite, K., Saburkina, I., Pauziene, N.,
Vaitkevicius, R., Noujaim, S.F., Jalife, J., and
Pauza, D.H. (2011). Immunohistochemical
characterization of the intrinsic cardiac neural
plexus in whole-mount mouse heart
preparations. Heart Rhythm 8, 731–738. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2011.01.013.

Schoﬁeld, J.N., Day, I.N., Thompson, R.J., and
Edwards, Y.H. (1995). PGP9.5, a ubiquitin
C-terminal hydrolase; pattern of mRNA and
protein expression during neural development in
the mouse. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 85, 229–238.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-3806(94)00217-N.

Schotzinger, R., Yin, X., and Landis, S. (1994).
Target determination of neurotransmitter
phenotype in sympathetic neurons. J. Neurobiol.
25, 620–639. https://doi.org/10.1002/neu.
480250605.

Shen, E.H., Overly, C.C., and Jones, A.R. (2012).
The Allen Human Brain Atlas: comprehensive
gene expression mapping of the human brain.
Trends Neurosci. 35, 711–714. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.tins.2012.09.005.

Smith-White, M.A., Iismaa, T.P., and Potter, E.K.
(2003). Galanin and neuropeptide Y reduce

cholinergic transmission in the heart of the
anaesthetised mouse. Br. J. Pharmacol. 140,
170–178. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bjp.0705404.

nervous system. J. Comp. Neurol. 492, 370–379.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.20745.

Soltani, M.H., Pichardo, R., Song, Z., Sangha, N.,
Camacho, F., Satyamoorthy, K., Sangueza, O.P.,
and Setaluri, V. (2005). Microtubule-associated
protein 2, a marker of neuronal differentiation,
induces mitotic defects, inhibits growth of
melanoma cells, and predicts metastatic
potential of cutaneous melanoma. Am. J. Pathol.
166, 1841–1850. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-
9440(10)62493-5.

Untergasser, A., Cutcutache, I., Koressaar, T., Ye,
J., Faircloth, B.C., Remm, M., and Rozen, S.G.
(2012). Primer3–new capabilities and interfaces.
Nucleic Acids Res. 40, e115. https://doi.org/10.
1093/nar/gks596.

Wake, E., and Brack, K. (2016). Characterization of
the intrinsic cardiac nervous system.
Auton.Neurosci. 199, 3–16. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.autneu.2016.08.006.

Ye, J., Coulouris, G., Zaretskaya, I., Cutcutache, I.,
Rozen, S., and Madden, T.L. (2012). Primer-
BLAST: a tool to design target-speciﬁc primers
for polymerase chain reaction. BMC
Bioinformatics 13, 134. https://doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2105-13-134.

Zarzoso, M., Rysevaite, K., Milstein, M.L., Calvo,
C.J., Kean, A.C., Atienza, F., Pauza, D.H., Jalife, J.,
and Noujaim, S.F. (2013). Nerves projecting from
the intrinsic cardiac ganglia of the pulmonary
veins modulate sinoatrial node pacemaker
function. Cardiovasc. Res. 99, 566–575. https://
doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvt081.

Zeisel, A., Hochgerner, H., Lo¨ nnerberg, P.,
Johnsson, A., Memic, F., van der Zwan, J., Ha¨ ring,
M., Braun, E., Borm, L.E., La Manno, G., et al.
(2018). Molecular architecture of the mouse
nervous system. Cell 174, 999–1014.e22. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.021.

Weihe, E., Schu¨ tz, B., Hartschuh, W., Anlauf, M.,
Scha¨ fer, M.K., and Eiden, L.E. (2005).
Coexpression of cholinergic and noradrenergic
phenotypes in human and nonhuman autonomic

Zhang, Y., Parmigiani, G., and Johnson, W.E.
(2020). ComBat-Seq: batch effect adjustment for
RNA-Seq count data. BioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.
1101/2020.01.13.904730.

18

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

iScience
Article

STAR+METHODS

KEY RESOURCES TABLE

ll

OPEN ACCESS

REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

Antibodies

anti-VACht antibody

anti-TH antibody

Critical commercial assays

Synaptic Systems

Millipore

Cat. No. 139103; RRID: AB_887864

Cat. No. AB1542; RRID:AB_90755

SuperScript VILO Master Mix

Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc

Cat#:11756500

Deposited data

Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) Portal

GTEx Analyis V8

dbGaP Accession phs000424.v8.p2; https://

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/

study.cgi?study_id=phs000424.v8.p2

Single-nucleus RNA sequencing analysis of

Hu et al.2017

GSE106678

adult mouse cerebral cortex

Single cell data from the human CNS

Allen Brain Map

RRID:SCR_017001; https://portal.brain-map.

RNAseq comparisons to the peripheral

Zeisel et al.2018

nervous system

org/atlases-and-data/rnaseq/human-

multiple-cortical-areas-smart-seq

http://mousebrain.org/genesearch.html;

Mousebrain.org.level1/L1_Enteric.loom;

Mousebrain.org.level1/L1_Sympathetic.loom

RNAseq comparisons to the peripheral

Furlan et al.2016

http://linnarssonlab.org/sympathetic/

nervous system

Raw sequencing data generated in this study

GEO database

Raw and processed HT-qPCR data of single

GEO database

neurons from the pig RAGP

GSE154119; GEO SuperSeries GSE154411

GSE149212; GEO SuperSeries GSE154411

Acquisition of single neurons and regional

Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve

https://doi.org/10.26275/56h4-ypua

neuronal samples from the porcine Right Atrial

Conditions (SPARC) data portal, sparc.science

Ganglionic Plexus (RAGP) through Laser

Capture Miscrodissection

Spatially Tracked Single-Cell-Scale RNAseq of

Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve

https://doi.org/10.26275/kabb-mkvu

Porcine Right Atrial Ganglionic Plexus (RAGP)

Conditions (SPARC) data portal, sparc.science

Neurons

Transcriptional Diversity of Single Neurons in

Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve

https://doi.org/10.26275/5jki-b4er

the Porcine Right Atrial Ganglionic Plexus

Conditions (SPARC) data portal, sparc.science

(RAGP)

Spatially Tracked Single-Neuron

Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve

https://doi.org/10.26275/qkzi-b1mq

Transcriptomics of a Female Porcine Right

Conditions (SPARC) data portal, sparc.science

Atrial Ganglionic Plexus (RAGP)

Spatially Tracked Single-Neuron

Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve

https://doi.org/10.26275/255m-00nj

Transcriptomics of a Male Porcine Right Atrial

Conditions (SPARC) data portal, sparc.science

Ganglionic Plexus (RAGP)

Dataset containing ﬁgures from the paper as

Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve

https://doi.org/10.26275/jdws-d7md

well as code and necessary ﬁles to generate

Conditions (SPARC) data portal, sparc.science

them.

Experimental models: organisms/strains

Model organism: Yucatan minipig

S&S Farms

N/A

Software and algorithms

R version 3.6.3 (Holding the Windsock)

The R Foundation for Statistical Computing

https://www.r-project.org/

(Continued on next page)

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

19

ll

OPEN ACCESS

Continued

REAGENT or RESOURCE

Subread R package

SOURCE

Liao et al., 2019

ComBat-seq

Zhang et al., 2020

iScience
Article

IDENTIFIER

https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/

bioc/html/Rsubread.html
sva package; https://bioconductor.org/
packages/release/bioc/html/sva.html

DESeq2

SCnorm

Love et al., 2014

https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/

bioc/html/DESeq.html

Bacher et al., 2017

https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/

Real-Time PCR Analysis Software

NormqPCR

Fluidigm

Bioconductor

bioc/html/SCnorm.html

https://www.ﬂuidigm.com/software

RRID:SCR_003388; https://bioconductor.org/

packages/release/bioc/html/NormqPCR.html

cluster R package

Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN)

https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/

cluster/index.html

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact

Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead
Contact, Rajanikanth Vadigepalli: rajanikanth.vadigepalli@jefferson.edu.

Material availability

This study did not generate new unique reagents.

Data and code availability

The authors declare that all the data supporting the ﬁndings of this study are available within the article and
its supplemental
information ﬁles or from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Raw
sequencing data generated in this study have been deposited at the GEO database under accession
code:GSE154119. Raw and processed HT-qPCR data of single neurons from the pig RAGP have been
deposited in the GEO database under accession code: GSE149212. The RNAseq and HT-qPCR
datasets constitute a GEO SuperSeries GSE154411. All sample acquisition images, raw and processed
transcriptomic data, and annotations pertaining to 3D spatial location are publicly available in the sparc.
science (RRID:SCR_017041) repository with the digital object identiﬁers https://doi.org/10.26275/56h4-
ypua, https://doi.org/10.26275/kabb-mkvu, https://doi.org/10.26275/5jki-b4er, https://doi.org/10.26275/
qkzi-b1mq, and https://doi.org/10.26275/255m-00nj. A dataset containing high-resolution ﬁgures, supple-
mental ﬁgures, movies and ﬁles, as well as the TissueMapper XML annotations and the R code to generate
the data-driven plots and visualizations illustrated in the ﬁgures are available at https://doi.org/10.26275/
jdws-d7md. Data analyzed from Hu et al. (2017) is available in the GEO database under the accession code
GSE106678. Data from GTEx was retrieved from GTEx Analysis V8 (dbGaP Accession phs000424.v8.p2
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs000424.v8.p2).
cell
data from the Human CNS was obtained through the Allen Brain Map (RRID:SCR_017001) project and is
available at https://portal.brain-map.org/atlases-and-data/rnaseq/human-multiple-cortical-areas-smart-
seq. Data for RNAseq comparisons to the peripheral nervous system is available through online resources
(http://mousebrain.org/genesearch.html; Mousebrain.org.level1/
associated with Zeisel et al.
L1_Enteric.loom; Mousebrain.org.level1/L1_Sympathetic.loom) and Furlan et al.
(http://
linnarssonlab.org/sympathetic/).

Single

(2016)

(2018)

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

Animal experiments were performed in accordance with the UCLA Institutional Animal Care and Use Com-
mittee, and euthanasia protocols conform to the National Institutes of Health’s Guide for the Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals (2011). Data for all experiments were collected from 2 male and 2 female normal
healthy Yucata´ n minipigs(>3 months old).

20

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

METHOD DETAILS

Optimization of neural tracers for laser capture microdissection

Fast Blue (Polysciences, 17740-1), CM-DiI (Thermo Fisher, C7000), Fast DiI (Thermo Fisher, D3899), TMR-
Dextran (Thermo Fisher, D3308), FluoroGold (Fluorochrome) as candidate ﬂuorescent tracers were
scanned for their compatibility with the dehydration protocol of laser capture microdissection before
the tracer was adapted in the minipig. In each animal, one of the ﬁve tracers was injected into Sprague
Dawley rats (3-4 months old, purchased from Envigo) sino-atrial node at the same volume of 10 mL and
the heart tissues were harvested in the time window 10 am-12 pm 14 days after injection and stored in
OCT immediately. Cryosections were visualized under a ﬂuorescence microscope before and after the
dehydration steps necessary for laser capture microdissection and acquisition of single neuron samples
(as detailed below). All ﬁve tracers labeled intrinsic cardiac nervous system neurons successfully but only
CM-DiI and Fast Blue-labeled neurons remained intact on the heart sections without ﬁxation, whereas
TMR-Dextran and FluoroGold-stained neurons were not visible under the microscope under the conditions
suitable for laser capture microdissection. Only Fast Blue provided reliable and consistent labeling visible
under laser capture microdissection microscope after the necessary dehydration procedure and was used
in the subsequent tracing experiments in the study.

Neural tracing experiments

For initial surgery, following sedation (induction: ketamine (10mg Kg-1 IM)/midazolam (1mg Kg-1 IM),
maintenance: isoﬂurane 1-2% inhalation) and intubation, a right unilateral thoracotomy was performed
by dividing the pectoral muscle, making a small incision in the pericardium, and exposing the right
atrial-superior vena cava junction. Then 5mg of Fast Blue (Polysciences), a neuronal tracer that is retained
and diffuses within the lipid bilayer, in 250uL of sterile water (2% weight/volume) was injected using a
27-gauge needle into the SAN region. A chest tube was placed, and the incision was closed. Immediately
prior to removal, the chest tube was aspirated. Tissues were harvested in a terminal procedure at least
3 weeks later as described below.

Porcine tissue collection

Following sedation (induction: tiletamine-zolazepam 6mg Kg-1 IM, maintenance: isoﬂurane 1-2% inhala-
tion) and intubation, we performed a midline sternotomy and exposed the heart. A heparin bolus of
5000U IV was administered, and the pig was then placed in ventricular ﬁbrillation with application of a
9V battery to the surface of the heart. The heart was explanted and syringe-ﬂushed with heparinized normal
saline (5U mL-1) via the transected aorta. The area of interest (RAGP-SAN region) was then excised and
rinsed in heparinized saline. RAGPs were separated from the SANs, immersed in 1x PBS at RT for 30 sec-
onds and transferred to 25% Optimal Cutting Temperature compound (OCT, TissueTek; VWR 25608-930),
followed by 50% OCT and then embedded in 100% OCT and placed in a cryomold. The cryomold was
placed in a methanol dry ice bath for ﬂash freezing.

Cryosectioning and staining
RAGP was sectioned along the superior-inferior axis (corresponding to the source animal) at 40mm
thickness, yielding between 447-1,030 sections per RAGP, with corresponding blockface images. Tissue
sections were mounted on PPS membrane slides (Leica Microsystems, Catalog 11600294). Slides were ﬁxed
in icecold ethanol (100% Ethanol) for a minute followed by four minutes of staining with 0.0001% Cresyl
Violet (ACROS Organics, AC229630050). The slides were dehydrated using 95% and 100% Ethanol followed
by Xylene for one minute each. The staining protocol was kept to under 15 minutes and an RNAse inhibitor
(Invitrogen SUPERase-In RNase Inhibitor, Catalog AM2696) was added to all aqueous reagents to preserve
RNA quality. More detailed methods can be found in the research protocol available at https://doi.org/10.
21203/rs.3.pex-928/v1.

Laser capture microdissection

Slides were stained and immediately processed for sample collection to preserve RNA quality using Laser
Capture Microdissection (Arcturus, ThermoFisher). SAN projecting and non SAN-projecting neurons were
identiﬁed under ﬂuorescence using FastBlue (excitation 365 nm, emission 420 nm) and 0.0001% cresyl-vi-
olet (585 nm excitation and 627 nm emission) stain and only cresyl-violet stain respectively. While it is
possible that the tracer failed to properly label all SAN-projecting neurons, for the purposes of this analysis,
all cells without FastBlue labeling were referred to as ‘‘non SAN-projecting’’ neurons. Neurons collected for

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

21

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

RNAseq were identiﬁed using 0.1% cresyl-violet stain. Samples were collected on LCM Caps and stored at
-80(cid:4)C. Samples were lysed at the time of gene expression experiments with appropriate lysis reagents
based on the downstream processing protocols (RNASeq or HT-qRTPCR). We stochastically sampled
nearly all of the neuronal clusters encountered throughout the RAGP from one of the animals, while the
other three animals were stochastically sampled throughout the RAGP in a less extensive manner.
More detailed methods can be found in the research protocol available at https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.
pex-927/v1.

Mapping LCM samples onto the reconstructed 3D stack

2D images of tissue blockface were acquired after each section. Using Tissue Mapper software 3D volume
of each RAGP was created from the outer contours of blockface images. Images taken during LCM sample
collection were assigned to corresponding sections in the 3D stack. Anatomical features and neurons
(collected and not collected) were assigned markers enabling extraction of speciﬁc XYZ coordinates for
the neurons in RAGP. Blockface images and acquisition images can be found at https://doi.org/10.
26275/56h4-ypua. More detailed methods can be found in the research protocol available at https://doi.
org/10.21203/rs.3.pex-922/v1.

RNASeq library preparation

Samples on LCM caps were processed for single cell scale RNASeq based on a protocol modiﬁed from
Foley et al., 2019(Foley et al., 2019). We followed the steps recommended for fresh frozen tissue with
the following modiﬁcations: We used 10ml of lysis buffer on HS Caps (original protocol recommends
5 ml). In the step 3 for performing PCR ampliﬁcation of the tagged mRNA fragments, we used 22 cycles
of PCR (maximum allowed). The original protocol relies on a formula to compute ampliﬁcation cycles,
and suggested 18 cycles based on sample RNA input and number of samples multiplexed per RNASeq
run. Our initial tests determined this to be too low for yielding sufﬁcient material for downstream
sequencing. Considering that the gene expression in our dataset varies in a similar order of magnitude
as in typical scRNAseq datasets, we suggest that the ampliﬁcation bias is not a dominant factor in the
data. The remaining steps of the protocol were followed as in the original. More detailed methods can
be found in the research protocol available at https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.pex-962/v1.

Single cell RNA-seq data analysis

Raw sequencing data (Illumina sequencer’s base call ﬁles (BCLs) was converted to Fastq ﬁles using the
Illumina bcl2fastq program. The reads were trimmed to remove polyA tail and G overhang, and the 5
base UMI was extracted. The genome sequence was indexed and the single reads were aligned to the
Sus scrofa reference genome sequence version Sus_scrofa.Sscrofa11.1.fasta available in the Ensembl data-
base (RRID:SCR_002344), using STAR software (RRID:SCR_015899) STAR-2.7.2a(Dobin et al., 2013). A modi-
ﬁed version of Sus_scrofa.Sscrofa11.1.95.gtf was used as a reference transcriptome. Feature count algo-
rithm (featureCounts, RRID:SCR_012919), Subread R package(Liao et al., 2019) was used to count the
reads to genomic features - genes and exons. These samples had an average sequencing depth of
2,591,998 reads/sample, with an average UMI count of 415,687/sample resulting in a median of 10,410
detectable genes/sample. A digital gene expression matrix was created from the gene counts. Multiple
batch correction algorithm ComBat-seq(Zhang et al., 2020) was used to account for technical variability
arising from batch effect. Out of 142 samples, 52 Samples with non-zero gene counts <6,000 were consid-
ered as outliers. Additionally, 10,800 genes that are present in very low quantities (<30 non-zero gene
counts) were ﬁltered out. A regularized log transformation was carried out using DESeq2(Love et al.,
2014). We normalized the ﬁltered data using a quantile regression method SCnorm(Bacher et al., 2017).
Our ﬁnal matrix consisted of 90 samples and 15,000 genes.

Extraction of signiﬁcant genes from GTEx

We generated a list of neuronal genes enriched in brain and neuronal tissues using data from the Genotype
Tissue Expression (GTEx) project. We downloaded the median gene expression values for all tissue types
from GTEx Analysis V8 (dbGaP Accession phs000424.v8.p2). Pavlidis Template Matching was used to ﬁnd
genes that were speciﬁcally enriched in brain and neuronal tissues (template-maximum for neuronal
tissues, minimum for non-neuronal tissues) with p value <0.01.

22

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

iScience
Article

ll

OPEN ACCESS

Identiﬁcation of highly variable genes using PCA

Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on 90 neuronal RNAseq samples showing expression of
15,000 genes in the RAGP. 100 genes were taken from each of the ﬁrst 50 PCs, the ﬁfty genes most positively
and most negatively contributing to each PC based on PC loadings, resulting in 1,814 genes that show the
most variability across the RAGP.

High-throughput real-time PCR

Single RAGP neurons in lysis buffer (Cells Direct Lysis Buffer, Invitrogen) were directly processed for reverse
transcriptase reaction using SuperScript VILOMaster Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA), fol-
lowed by real-time PCR for targeted ampliﬁcation and detection using the Evagreen intercalated dye-
based approach to detect the PCR-ampliﬁed product. Intron-spanning PCR primers were designed for
every assay using Primer3(Untergasser et al., 2012) and BLAST(Ye et al., 2012). Genes were selected
from across a wide array of neuronal functions, signal transduction and cell type identiﬁcation. The stan-
dard BioMark protocol was used to process cDNA samples for 22 cycles of speciﬁc target ampliﬁcation
of 283 genes using TaqMan PreAmp Master Mix as per the manufacturer’s protocol (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA, USA). Real-time PCR reactions were performed using 96.96 BioMark Dynamic Arrays (Fluid-
igm, South San Francisco, CA, USA) enabling quantitative measurement of multiple mRNAs and samples
under identical reaction conditions. Each run consisted of 30 ampliﬁcation cycles (15 s at 95(cid:4)C, 5 s at 70(cid:4)C,
60 s at 60(cid:4)C). Ct values were calculated by the Real-Time PCRAnalysis Software (Fluidigm). Twenty one 96 3
96 BioMark Arrays were used to measure gene expression across all the (422 samples before QC) single-cell
samples from 4 RAGP. The same serial dilution sample set was included in each chip to verify reproduc-
ibility and test for technical variability. This 6-point dilution series also serves to detect any over-ampliﬁca-
tion that may lead to a bias in the data. Samples from each animal were run across three chips to obtain data
on 283 genes per sample. Each set of chip runs for a given animal contained overlapping assays that served
as technical replicates to evaluate chip-to-chip variability. A chip-to-chip comparison of the serial dilution
samples and neuronal/assay technical replicates demonstrates the high reproducibility with minimal tech-
nical variability of our data (Figure S10). More detailed methods can be found in the research protocol avail-
able at https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.pex-919/v1.

HT-qPCR data analysis

Individual qRT-PCR results were examined to determine the quality of the qRT-PCR based on melt-curve
analysis. Following this initial quality control, samples with >30% failed reactions and genes with >20%
failed reactions were excluded from present analysis. A further 10 samples were determined to be outliers
due overall gene expression distributions and were removed from the present analysis. Upon ﬁltering
based on these criteria, a total of 405 single-cell samples (152 non SAN-projecting neurons, 169 SAN-pro-
jecting neurons, and 84 neurons without reliable connectivity information) and 241 different gene assays
were carried forward in the present analysis, with 211 genes showing >60% detectable expression across
all RAGPs, which were used for the majority of the analysis. Raw Ct values for individual samples were
normalized against a median expression level of a subset of 140 robustly expressed genes (genes with
greater than 60% working reactions) across all animals to obtain -DCt values.The vector of median sample
expression value was chosen over potential reference genes based on comparison of stable expression
across all samples against known housekeeping genes using the ‘selectHKs’ function in the NormqPCR
package in R (RRID:SCR_003388). The following equation was used to calculate -DCt values for each
gene: (cid:1) DCtgene = ðmedian sample expressionÞ (cid:1) Ctgene.

The -DCt data were then rescaled using the median across all samples within a gene using the following
equation:

(cid:1)DDCtgene = (cid:1)

(cid:1)

DCtsample (cid:1) DCtacross(cid:1)sample(cid:1)median

(cid:3)

:

The raw and normalized dataset is available online as a Gene Expression Omnibus (RRID:SCR_005012) da-
taset (GEO reference ID: GSE149212) and on sparc.science (RRID:SCR_017041) portal at https://doi.org/10.
26275/5jki-b4er.

Determination of abundant/detectable expression

We considered a sample to have detectable expression of any given gene if any signal was detected in the
HT-qPCR assay. A sample was considered to have abundant expression if its expression of that gene was

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

23

ll

OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article

less than 15 Ct. One exception is the expression level of Chat. The levels of Chat in the second female RAGP
(Pig 1729) had a median expression of 7 Ct higher than that of the other 3 RAGP. Despite the reduced
expression of Chat in raw Ct, it is important to note that the range of expression remains the same despite
the decrease in abundance. Due to this consistency in range and pattern, we considered samples from Pig
1729 to have abundant expression if it had a Ct less than 22, consistent with the 7 Ct difference between the
medians of expression.

Clustering and template matching to identify transcriptional states

Single neurons were separated into different subpopulations based on their molecular proﬁles using Pav-
lidis Template Matching. Brieﬂy, template matching estimates the correlation between a rescaled expres-
sion proﬁle used as the template and a test expression proﬁle. The canonical subpopulations were identi-
ﬁed in SAN-projecting samples from one female and one male RAGP using hierarchical clustering (Pearson
correlation, complete linkage) yielding seven sample clusters. The average silhouette width for all clusters
(estimated using the cluster package in R) was 0.217, signiﬁcantly higher than 1,000 randomized trials. Gene
medians of these clusters were used as templates to classify the non SAN-projecting cells into one of the
canonical subpopulations. We used an R-based cutoff for our template match analysis (threshold R = 0.45).
Single neurons that did not pass the R value threshold for any of the canonical templates were sequestered
into a separate cluster, yielding 8 clusters total. Samples from another male (with cells annotated for pro-
jection) and female (without cells annotated for projection) were sorted into the original states based on
correlation to the template proﬁle (Figures 4A andS3). Finally, based on visual examination, three states
were combined to form state A based on their similar expression proﬁles, giving 6 total transcriptional
states. An enrichment assessed by a one-way ANOVA and post hoc Tukey Honest Signiﬁcant Difference
was used to examine genes that were signiﬁcantly enriched in one or more states. A gene was considered
to be enriched in a state if p value <0.01 for at least two other states (Figures 4D–4F).

Plots for showing abundance and range of gene expression in Ct space

In order to accurately display the range of the normalized data while also keeping in mind the overall abun-
dance of each gene throughout the 4 RAGP, the -DDCt data was visualized in Ct space. To do this, we ﬁrst
conﬁrmed that the median Ct of each gene was relatively consistent across all 4 RAGP. The normalized
expression for each animal was multiplied by -1 and then offset by the median gene expression across
all 4 RAGP. This resulted in a plot that displayed expression level in Ct space (where the lower the Ct
the higher the expression), showing the overall abundance of the gene in question across 4 RAGP while
maintaining the normalized range of expression (across all RAGP for some ﬁgures, and comparing the
ranges of each RAGP for other ﬁgures).

Paracrine network analysis

Different paracrine signaling states of single neurons in the RAGP were created from the combination of
identiﬁers that describe whether a neuron is more likely to transmit a neuropeptide signal, be activated
by that signal, or both. Each neuron was identiﬁed as peptide+ or peptide-based on whether or not the
neuron in question expressed the given peptide above or below the median expression value for that
gene. Likewise, each neuron was identiﬁed as receptor+ if any one of the corresponding receptors showed
expression above the median value for either receptor. Applying these identiﬁers to each peptide-receptor
set resulted in 8 possible unique identiﬁers for each set, which when combined resulted in 64 possible
unique identiﬁers. After applying these identiﬁers to the 405 sampled neurons, at least one neuron was as-
signed to 61 out of the 64 possible identiﬁers, indicating a large and widespread network of neuropeptide
signaling, even when examining only 3 neuropeptides and their cognate receptors (Data S1). Of those 61
states, 12 groups have a frequency of more than 10 sampled neurons, representing a total of 224 out of the
405 single neurons, about 55%. A network representation of these 12 identiﬁed groups further highlights
the interconnected nature of signaling between neurons.

Confocal staining and visualization

Porcine RAGP fat pads were ﬁxed in cold 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 24 h, cryoprotected in cold 20%
sucrose in PBS, and sectioned at 30 mm thickness using a Leica CM3050S cryostat (Leica Microsystems Inc.,
Bannockburn, IL, USA). Sections were collected on charged slides and immunostained at room tempera-
ture using standard methods of ﬂuorescence immunohistochemistry, as described previously(Hoard
et al., 2008; Hoover et al., 2009; Kaestner et al., 2019). Antibodies to vesicular acetylcholine transporter

24

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

iScience
Article

ll

OPEN ACCESS

(VAChT; Synaptic Systems, Cat. No. 139103, RRID: AB_887864,1:500 dilution) and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH;
Millipore, Cat. No. AB1542, RRID:AB_90755, 1:500 dilution) were used to label cholinergic and noradren-
ergic neurons, respectively. The VAChT antibody was generated in rabbit using aa 475-530 from rat VAChT
as the immunogen, and it has been validated by experiments with knockout and knockdown mice as well as
by immunohistochemistry and Western blotting. The TH antibody was generated in sheep using native TH
from rat pheochromocytoma, and it has been validated by immunohistochemistry and Western blotting.
Sections were washed and blocked before incubation overnight with both primary antibodies. This was fol-
lowed by washing and blocking again before addition of species-speciﬁc donkey secondary antibodies
conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 for VAChT and biotin-SP for TH (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories).
After incubation for 2 h with secondary antibodies and washing with PBS, sections were incubated with
streptavidin conjugated Cy3 (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories) to amplify the TH signal. Sections
were then washed with PBS, and cover glasses were applied with Citiﬂuor (Ted Pella, Inc.) or SlowFade
Gold antifade reagent (Life Technologies Corporation, Eugene, OR, USA). Cover glasses were sealed
with clear nail polish. Speciﬁc staining did not occur in negative control sections processed without the
addition of the primary antibodies.The localization of VAChT and TH was evaluated by confocal micro-
images were
scopy with a Leica TCS SP8 Confocal Microscope (Leica Microsystems Inc.). Confocal
collected at a resolution of 1024X1024 by sequential scans using 488 and 552 laser lines. Stacks of optical
sections, with the section number optimized by the software, were collected for regions of interest using 4-
line averages for each scan. Stacks spanned the entire tissue thicknesses. Figures were created using
maximum intensity projection images for individual channels and merged images. These images compress
the stack of optical images into a two-dimensional view by showing only the highest intensity pixel across
the stack for each point.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

All statistical analysis was done using the ‘R’ programming language. Pavlidis Template Matching was used
to ﬁnd genes that were speciﬁcally enriched in the brain and neuronal tissues from GTEx data with a p value
<0.01. Pavlidis Template Matching was also used to to separate single neurons into different subpopula-
tions and a subsequent ANOVA and post hoc Tukey Honest Signiﬁcant Difference was used to examine
genes that were enriched in one or more subpopulations for p < 0.01. More information regarding statis-
tical analysis can be found within each ﬁgure legend and the accompanying sections within the method
details.

iScience 24, 102713, July 23, 2021

25

