ORIGINAL RESEARCH

scRNA-Seq Reveals New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF,
NRTN, and TBX3

Christina M. Wright,1,* Sabine Schneider,1,* Kristen M. Smith-Edwards,2,3,4 Fernanda Mafra,5
Anita J. L. Leembruggen,6 Michael V. Gonzalez,5 Deepika R. Kothakapa,1
Jessica B. Anderson,1 Beth A. Maguire,1 Tao Gao,1 Tricia A. Missall,7 Marthe J. Howard,8
Joel C. Bornstein,6 Brian M. Davis,2,3,4 and Robert O. Heuckeroth1

1Department of Pediatrics, Abramson Research Center, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, Perelman
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 2Department of Neurobiology, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 3Pittsburgh Center for Pain Research, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 4Center for Neuroscience at the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 5Center for
Applied Genomics, Abramson Research Center, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; 6Department of Physiology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 7Department of Dermatology,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; and 8Department of Neurosciences, University of Toledo Health Sciences Campus,
Toledo, Ohio

SUMMARY

Using single-cell RNA analysis and advanced imaging
methods on the enteric nervous system, we deﬁne many
differentially expressed genes in myenteric neuron sub-
types, validate numerous ﬁndings, and describe new func-
tions for TBX3, glial cell line–derived neurotrophic factor,
and neurturin in the bowel.

TBX3, GDNF and NRTN. These data facilitate molecular diag-
nostic studies and novel therapeutics for bowel motility dis-
orders. (Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;11:1548–1593;
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2020.12.014)

Keywords: Calcium Imaging; Pou3f3 (Brn1); Transcription
Factors; Human and Mouse Colon.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Bowel function requires coordi-
nated activity of diverse enteric neuron subtypes. Our aim was
to deﬁne gene expression in these neuron subtypes to facilitate
development of novel therapeutic approaches to treat devas-
tating enteric neuropathies, and to learn more about enteric
nervous system function.

METHODS: To identify subtype–speciﬁc genes, we performed
single-nucleus RNA-seq on adult mouse and human colon
myenteric plexus, and single-cell RNA-seq on E17.5 mouse ENS
cells from whole bowel. We used immunohistochemistry, select
mutant mice, and calcium imaging to validate and extend
results.

RESULTS: RNA-seq on 635 adult mouse colon myenteric neu-
rons and 707 E17.5 neurons from whole bowel deﬁned seven
adult neuron subtypes, eight E17.5 neuron subtypes and hun-
dreds of differentially expressed genes. Manually dissected
human colon myenteric plexus yielded RNA-seq data from 48
neurons, 3798 glia, 5568 smooth muscle, 377 interstitial cells
of Cajal, and 2153 macrophages.
Immunohistochemistry
demonstrated differential expression for BNC2, PBX3, SATB1,
RBFOX1, TBX2, and TBX3 in enteric neuron subtypes. Condi-
tional Tbx3 loss reduced NOS1-expressing myenteric neurons.
Differential Gfra1 and Gfra2 expression coupled with calcium
imaging revealed that GDNF and neurturin acutely and differ-
entially regulate activity of w50% of myenteric neurons with
distinct effects on smooth muscle contractions.

CONCLUSION: Single cell analyses deﬁned genes differentially
expressed in myenteric neuron subtypes and new roles for

T he enteric nervous system (ENS) is a network of

neurons and glia within the bowel wall that is
crucial for normal bowel function.1 ENS defects include
developmental anomalies (Hirschsprung disease [HSCR] and
primary chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction) and ac-
quired defects (achalasia, gastroparesis, Parkinson’s disease,
and Chagas disease). Unfortunately, we have limited ability
to identify missing or defective ENS cell populations in
are
people with bowel dysmotility,

and therapies

*Authors share co-ﬁrst authorship.
Abbreviations used in this paper: ACSF, artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid;
BSA, bovine serum albumin; DBPBS, Dulbecco-modiﬁed phosphate-
buffered saline; DMEM, Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium; EFS,
electrical ﬁeld stimulation; EGFP, enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein;
ENK, enkephalin; ENS, enteric nervous system; FACS, ﬂuorescence-
activated cell sorter; FBS, fetal bovine serum; GDNF, glial cell line–
derived neurotrophic factor; GO, Gene Ontology; HBSS, Hank’s
balanced salt solution; HSCR, Hirschsprung disease; IACUC, Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee; ICC, interstitial cells of Cajal;
IRB, institutional review board; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinu-
cleotide phosphate; NDS, normal donkey serum; NRTN, neurturin;
NOS1, neuronal nitric oxide synthase; OCT, optimal cutting tempera-
ture; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; PFA, paraformaldehyde; RIN,
RNA integrity number; RNA-seq, RNA sequencing; RT, room temper-
ature; RT-PCR,
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction;
SMC, smooth muscle cell; SP, substance P; t-SNE, t-distributed sto-
chastic neighbor embedding; TTX, tetrodotoxin; UMI, unique molecu-
lar identiﬁer.

Most current article

© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the AGA
Institute. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
2352-345X
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2020.12.014

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1549

inadequate. Promising new approaches like regenerative
line–derived neurotrophic factor
medicine2 or glial cell
(GDNF)–induced regeneration of the ENS3 would beneﬁt
from a more thorough characterization of the transcription
factors, receptors, and signaling pathways that deﬁne
enteric neuron subclasses.

Several laboratories, ours included, previously used bulk
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) or microarray analyses to
delineate ENS gene expression patterns. Memic et al,4 in
particular, combined bulk RNA-seq with immunohisto-
chemistry to identify transcription factors in enteric neu-
rons with distinct neurochemical signatures at different
embryonic ages. While this was a signiﬁcant advance, frozen
sections provided limited information regarding co-
localization of transcription factors with other markers
and there was little quantitative data.

We hypothesized that ENS subpopulations could be
more deﬁnitively characterized using single-cell RNA
sequencing. As our studies proceeded, other groups pursued
similar work, each with a unique focus.5–9 Zeisel et al6 used
single-cell sequencing to deﬁne enteric neuron subtypes in
the small intestine myenteric plexus of young adult mice.
Morarach et al extended their analysis with greatly
increased numbers of young adult mouse myenteric neu-
rons as well as developing (E15.5 and E18.5) mouse small
intestine.5 They identiﬁed 12 neuron subtypes and showed
depletion of CALBþ enteric neurons in Pbx3–/– mice.5,6
May-Zhang et al7 identiﬁed 14 distinct neuron clusters in
adult mouse ENS and highlighted differences between
bowel regions. They then compared murine data to bulk
human ENS RNA-seq analysis and discovered distinct mouse
and human intrinsic primary afferent neuron subtypes.7
Drokhlyansky et al8 tackled the difﬁcult problem of

sequencing rare human enteric neurons, circumventing the
issue of neuron scarcity by overloading nuclei into droplets
and retroactively ﬁltering out doublets, a technique they
dubbed MIRACL-seq. Using this strategy, they sequenced
1445 human enteric neurons and identiﬁed 14 neuron
subsets in the colon. Other papers provided additional data
about single cells in developing mouse ENS on a smaller
scale.9 Collectively, these manuscripts, each with a unique
focus, deﬁne 8–14 myenteric neuron types and >20 total
enteric neuron types, plus 4–7 types of enteric glia,
consistent with anatomic and functional analyses over
decades.10–12 Our study provides additional RNA-seq data
from the ENS of whole bowel at E17.5 and from adult mouse
colon, new data from human colon cells that control bowel
motility, extensive validation using state-of-the-art confocal
imaging, and unique analysis of ENS structure in 4 mutant
mouse lines deﬁcient in transcription factors preferentially
expressed in cholinergic or nitrergic neurons. We also
leveraged our data to identify novel roles for GDNF and
neurturin (NRTN) in the ENS.

We focused on distinctions between myenteric nitrergic
(nitric oxide–producing) and cholinergic (acetylcholine-
producing) neurons because they comprise >89% of human
and >95% of mouse myenteric neuron types.13,14 We found
many cell type–speciﬁc ion channels, neurotransmitters,
adhesion proteins, and signaling pathways supporting
functional connectivity, and identiﬁed >40 differentially
expressed transcriptional regulators, including Tbx3. Tbx3 is
preferentially expressed in neuronal nitric oxide synthase
(NOS1)–producing myenteric neurons, and mice lacking
Tbx3 in ENS had a 30% reduction in NOS1 neurons. Another
intriguing ﬁnding was that nitrergic neurons express Gfra1,
but cholinergic neurons express Gfra2 in adult and E17.5

Table 1.Methods Used to Isolate Cells or Nuclei for RNA-Seq

Genotype

Wnt1-Cre;R26R-EGFP

Wnt1-Cre;R26R-
tdTomato

Whole Cells, or
Nuclei?

Cells

Cells

Description

The EGFP signal in Wnt1-Cre;R26R-EGFP animals was too weak to ﬂow sort effectively given

the high degree of background in the 488 channel.

The localization of tdTomato to neurites in our Wnt1-Cre;R26R-Tdtomato line was problematic,
since we desired clean separation of single cells. Sorting myenteric plexus from this mouse
line often resulted in preps with neurites attached to tdTomato- cells. We tried dissociating
with different proteases (cold active protease, dispase, and collagenase), different incubation
times (15 min, 30 min), multiple methods of trituration (pipette-based, needle-based), and
different bowel layers, with little improvement in outcome

Wnt1-Cre;ROSANT-NG

Nuclei

Wnt1-Cre;RosaNT-NG mice had tdTomato in their nuclei at baseline; with CRE-induced

recombination, they accumulated EGFP in their nuclei instead of tdTomato. Unfortunately,
these mice lost ﬂuorescent signal during the Dounce homogenization procedure. We
hypothesize that membrane damage associated with homogenization led to diffusion of GFP
and loss of signal.

Wnt1-Cre;Rosa26 LSL
H2B mCherry

Nuclei

Successful and used to generate data in Figures 1–4.

Wild-type

Nuclei

We attempted to use directly conjugated NeuN and PHOX2B antibodies to isolate mouse ENS
nuclei with ﬂow sorting, since some neuronal nuclei in mouse stain with this NeuN antibody
by immunohistochemistry. We were unsuccessful.

EGFP, enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein; ENS, enteric nervous system; GFP, green ﬂuorescent protein; RNA-seq, RNA
sequencing.

1550

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1551

mouse myenteric plexus. GFRA1 and GFRA2 are cell surface
receptors that bind preferentially to GDNF and NRTN,
respectively. Using calcium imaging, we tested the hypoth-
esis that GDNF and NRTN acutely affect ENS function and
bowel motility in adulthood and discovered strikingly
different effects of these trophic factors on GCaMP6s activity
in enteric neurons, with procontractility effects of GDNF.
Collectively, our single-cell RNA-seq data provide highly
validated information about gene expression in mouse and
human ENS, supporting a new foundation for ENS cell
classiﬁcation.

Results
Single Nucleus RNA-Seq Deﬁnes Mouse Distal
Colon Enteric Neuron Subpopulations

this Wnt1-Cre model

We tried many approaches for isolating the ENS from the
adult mouse distal colon for sequencing (Table 1). Ulti-
mately, myenteric plexus nuclei were isolated from 47- to
52-day-old Wnt1-CreCre/wt; R26R-LSL-H2B-mCherry mice that
express the ﬂuorescent nuclear protein Histone 2B-mCherry
after CRE-induced DNA recombination (Figure 1A–D). We
used Wnt1-Cre to induce H2B-mCherry expression because
induces
prior studies show that
recombination in almost all enteric neurons and glia at E13.5
and almost all colonic neurons in E18.5 and adult mice, with
no ectopic expression in other bowel cells.15,16 We observed
mCherry in w73% of adult colon myenteric neurons in our
colony, a smaller percentage than previously reported, but
decided to proceed with analyses. Tissue was frozen and
cryosectioned to disrupt smooth muscle cells, improving
yield. Dounce homogenization released nuclei (Figure 1E).
The 10x Genomics platform (10x Genomics, Pleasanton, CA)
generated data from 1520 mCherryþ neuronal and glial
nuclei. Because of low read depth, we included intronic
reads, yielding a mean of 2970 unique molecular identiﬁers
(UMIs) and 1549 genes per cell.

Using CellRanger and Seurat,17 we identiﬁed 12 clusters:
4 glial (Plp1þ, Sox10þ), 4 neuronal (Elavl4þ), and several
including Pdgfraþ (PDGFRaþ
non-ENS (6.5% of total),
cells), Kitþ (interstitial cells of Cajal [ICC]), and Actg2þ
(smooth muscle cells [SMCs]) (Figure 1F). Mean UMI and
gene counts were higher for neurons than glia (neurons:
4629 UMIs, 2217 genes; glia: 1780 UMIs, 1069 genes)
(Figure 1G). To reﬁne analyses, we reclustered neuronal
groups (Figure 1H) and identiﬁed 7 clusters (635 neurons
total).

Two neuron groups (Nos1 and Nos2) express Nos1, Vip,
and Gal, consistent with known coexpression in NOS1þ/
VIPþ inhibitory motor neurons and interneurons.12,18 Chat1
and
cells

acetyl-transferase

express

choline

(Chat)

preprotachykinin (substance P [SP] precursor, Tac1), but
not proenkephalin (Penk), consistent with excitatory motor
or intrinsic sensory neurons.19,20 Chat2 cells express Chat,
Tac1, and Penk, which marks guinea pig ileum excitatory
motor neurons and ascending interneurons. Chat3 cells
express Chat, Tac1, Penk, and hepatocyte growth factor re-
ceptor Met (Figures 1I, 2A and B, and 3). We tested if Tac1
and Penk expression could differentiate between motor
neurons and interneurons. Immunohistochemistry showed
that in circular smooth muscle, 55.3 ± 8.4% of SP-containing
varicosities do not contain enkephalin (ENK) (Figure 2K–M),
but in myenteric ganglia, w25% of SP terminals lack ENK
and vice versa (Figure 2E–J and M). An additional clustered
neuron group appeared heterogeneous. We manually
divided these neurons into Chat4, which express Chat, Penk,
and Slc17a6 (encoding VGLUT2), and Calcb, which express
Calcb, Grp, and Nmu. We hypothesize that Chat4 are in-
terneurons since VAChTþ/VGLUT2þ terminals were re-
ported in mouse distal colon myenteric ganglia but not in
muscle.21 Chat/Penk/Vglut2 neurons also express Calb1, a
calcium-binding protein in mouse interneurons.12,22 To
further validate Vglut2/Chat coexpression, we bred Vglut2-
IRES-Cre;TdTomato (cid:2) ChAT-L10A-EGFP and found 95.9 ±
0.9% of TDTOMATOþ neurons in myenteric plexus coex-
pressed enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein (EGFP)
(Figure 2N–P).

Many neurotransmitters (Figure 2A and B) and neuro-
transmitter receptors (Figure 2C and D) were differentially
expressed between neuron subgroups, including receptors
for acetylcholine, glutamate, serotonin, opioids, and purines.
Neuron groups also differentially expressed signaling mol-
ecules (Figure 3), ion channels (Figure 4), axon guidance
molecules, adhesion proteins, survival factors, and other
receptors.

Single-Nucleus Sequencing Reveals Distinct
Roles for GDNF and NRTN in Mouse Distal Colon

in

Gfra2 was

We were particularly intrigued that Gfra1 and Gfra2,
preferred receptors for GDNF and NRTN, respectively, were
abundant in glia but differentially expressed in neuron
Chatþ neurons
subsets.
primarily
(Figure 5A–C), consistent with prior studies.23 Gfra1 was
primarily in Nos/Vip/Galþ neurons. We could not ﬁnd re-
ports of Gfra1-restricted expression in adult mouse ENS, so
we tested if NOS1 colocalized with GFP in the distal colon of
Gfra1Gfp/wt mice that express GFP from a Gfra1 locus.24 GFP
was in 88.9 ± 1.8% of NOS1þ neurons, 8.8 ± 5.7% of NOS1-
negative neurons (Figure 5D and E), and in S100bþ glia
(Figure 5F) consistent with RNA-seq. Coupled with the
observation that GDNF acts acutely in the ascending

Figure 1. (See previous page). Adult mouse distal colon myenteric plexus RNA-seq deﬁnes neuron and glia subtypes.
(A–D) H2B-mCherry ﬂuorescence (red) in 50-day-old Wnt1-crecre/wt; R26R-H2B-mCherrych/wt mice colocalizes with HuC/Dþ
neurons (green) and S100bþ glia (blue) in the ENS. w73% of HuC/Dþ neurons were H2B-mCherryþ. Scale bar ¼ 100 mm. (E)
RNA-seq workﬂow with t-SNE containing all cells. (F) Feature plots for Actg2, Kit, Pdgfra, Plp1, and Elavl4 indicate the lo-
cations of SMC, PDGFRaþ cells, ICC, neurons, and glia, respectively. Color key represents loge(normalized gene expression).
(G) Violin plots of neuronal and glial clusters. (H) t-SNE of neuron clusters (I) Feature plots for selected markers highlight neuron
subtypes. Color shows loge(normalized gene expression).

1552

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1553

peristaltic response,25 our data suggest that GDNF and
NRTN have opposing acute effects on bowel contractility,
although both activate RET.

To test this, we recorded myenteric neuron calcium
transients in GDNF or NRTN-treated full-thickness colon of
E2a-Cre;R26R-GCaMP6s mice that express the calcium indi-
cator GCaMP6s in all cells (Figure 5G and H). We also
simultaneously monitored colon movement, an indirect
measure of muscle tension.26 GDNF and NRTN increased or
decreased spontaneous GCaMP6s activity in 50% (260/523)
of myenteric neurons (Figure 5I–K). Only 8.3% responded
to GDNF and NRTN (Figure 5J), suggesting that most effects
are via their preferred receptors, GFRA1 and GFRA2,
respectively. To test this, we identiﬁed nitrergic neurons
post hoc in 3 ﬁelds. A total of 63% (n ¼ 29 of 48) of neurons
responding only to GDNF were nitrergic and 25% (n ¼ 17 of
68) NRTN-only responders were nitrergic (Figure 5L–Q).
The high percentage of GDNF-responsive non-nitrergic
neurons suggested some GCaMP6s activity changes were
due to synaptic connectivity. Remarkably, when we added
the voltage-gated sodium channel blocker tetrodotoxin
(TTX), only 8%–9% of myenteric neurons had GDNF- or
NRTN-induced changes in GCaMP6s signal with minimal
and NRTN-inﬂuenced cells
overlap between GDNF-
(Figure 6A and B). This suggests GDNF and NRTN have
direct and indirect effects on GCaMP6s activity in distinct
myenteric neurons.

GDNF also increased myenteric neurons responding to
oral electrical ﬁeld stimulation (EFS) applied 5 mm from
the imaged ﬁeld by 71.3 ± 17.5% (P ¼ .0068) but did not
affect responses to EFS applied 5 mm aboral to recorded
ganglia (P ¼ .49) (Figure 6C and D). In contrast, NRTN did
not affect
the percentage of EFS-responsive myenteric
neurons, regardless of stimulus location (P ¼ .116 aboral,
P ¼ .188 oral) (Figure 6E and F). GDNF and NRTN both
altered which neurons responded to oral and/or aboral
EFS (data not shown). GDNF also robustly increased
spontaneous and oral EFS-induced movement in the im-
aging ﬁeld (P ¼ .0230) (Figure 6G, H, K, and M). NRTN

decreased movement in 3 of 5 preparations, but this was
not statistically signiﬁcant (Figure 6I, J, L, and M). These
that GDNF and NRTN inﬂuence
observations suggest
distinct myenteric neurons and GDNF acutely enhances
colon contractility.

Sequencing Suggests Combinatorial
Transcription Factor Codes Deﬁne Neuron
Subtypes

To gain insight

into neuronal subtype identity, we
examined transcription and splicing factors (regulatory
genes) in adult colon myenteric neurons. Some genes that
affect ENS subtype ratios (eg, Ascl1, Hand2, Sox6) were not
differentially expressed in adult neuron subtypes, but others
not known to affect subtype speciﬁcation (eg, Tbx3, Tlx2,
Zeb2)27,28 were differentially expressed (Figure 7). Many
other transcription factors had distinct expression patterns
in neuron subgroups including Pbx3, Etv1, Casz1, Bnc2, and
Zfhx3 (Figure 7).

We pursued immunohistochemistry on regulatory genes
differentially expressed in cholinergic or nitrergic neurons,
as most myenteric neurons express either Chat or Nos1. We
used ChAT-EGFP-L10A mice that reliably express EGFP at
high levels in CHATþ cells, as CHAT antibody staining is
often weak.29 Consistent with RNA-seq, SATB1, RBFOX1,
and PBX3 are preferentially in Chat-EGFPþ neurons
(Figure 8A, C–E, I–K). TBX3 was primarily in NOS1þ neu-
rons (Figure 8A, F, and L). RNA-seq also suggested Etv1
enrichment in NOS1þ neurons, which we validated by
treating Etv1-CreERT2Cre/wt;R26R-TdTomato mice with high-
dose tamoxifen to induce TDTOMATO from Etv1þ regula-
tory elements (Figure 8A, G, and M). Also consistent with
RNA-seq, PHOX2B protein had similar abundance in Chat-
EGFPþ and Chat-EGFP–myenteric neurons (Figure 8A, F,
and L). Distribution of these transcription factors between
Chat-EGFPþ and NOS1þ neurons (summarized in Figure 8N
and O) shows substantial correlation between protein and
RNA-seq data (Figure 7).

Figure 2. (See previous page). Expression patterns of neurotransmitters, neurotransmitter receptors, and common
immunohistochemistry (IHC) markers, and validation of ENK and SP coexpression in adult mouse colon. (A) Average
expression for neurotransmitters and IHC markers that were differentially expressed between distinct neuron and glial sub-
classes. (B) Proportion of cells per cluster with expression values >0 for differentially expressed neurotransmitters and IHC
markers. (C) Average expression for neurotransmitter receptors and subunits that were differentially expressed between
distinct neuron and glial subclasses. (D) Proportion of cells per cluster with expression values >0 for differentially expressed
neurotransmitter receptors and subunits. (A, C) Color key represents loge(normalized average gene expression within each
cluster). (E–G) ENK (green) colocalizes with SP (red) in myenteric neuron cell bodies in (E) proximal, (F) mid, and (H) distal colon.
(H–J) Most myenteric intraganglionic neuron varicosities in (H) proximal, (I) mid, and (J) distal colon express both ENK (green)
and SP (red). (K, L) Most enkephalinþ (green) neuron varicosities in circular smooth muscle in (K) mid colon and (L) distal colon
also express SP (red), but only a subset of substance P-expressing neuron varicosities in circular smooth muscle express
ENK. (E–L) Images representative of n ¼ 3 preparations per colon region and n ¼ 3 images per preparation. (M) Quantiﬁcation
of colocalization of ENK and SP in varicosities within mid colon myenteric ganglia and within circular smooth muscle. (N) EGFP
(green) ﬂuorescence signal colocalizes with TDTOMATOþ (red) neurons (blue) in Vglut2-IRES-Cre; R26R-TdTomato; ChAT-
EGFP-L10A mice. (O) In a small subset of HuC/Dþ neurons (blue), TDTOMATOþ (red) does not colocalize with EGFP ﬂuo-
rescence signal in Vglut2-IRES-Cre; R26R-TdTomato; ChAT-EGFP-L10A mice. (P) Quantiﬁcation of the colocalization of EGFP
ﬂuorescence with TDTOMATO ﬂuorescence in Vglut2-IRES-Cre; R26R-TdTomato mice. (E–G) Scale bar ¼ 10 mm. (H–L) Scale
bar ¼ 5 mm. (E–L) White arrows point toward cells and varicosities that express both ENK and SP. (H–L) White arrowheads
point toward varicosities that express enkephalin only. Empty arrowheads point toward varicosities that express SP only.
(M, P) Mean ± SD.

1554

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

Figure 3. Average expression and percent cells per cluster with detectable levels of differentially expressed signaling
pathway molecules in adult distal mouse colon. (A) Average expression for selected ligands (left) and receptors (right) that
were differentially expressed between distinct neuron and glial subclasses. Color key represents loge(normalized average gene
expression within each cluster). (B) Proportion of cells per cluster with expression values >0 for differential expressed ligands
(left) and receptors (right).

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1555

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

Figure 4. Average expression and percent cells per cluster with detectable levels of differentially expressed ion
channels in adult distal mouse colon. (A) Average expression of differentially expressed ion channel (subunit) genes for
different neuron and glial groups. Color key represents loge(normalized average gene expression within each cluster). (B)
Proportion of cells per cluster with expression values >0 for differentially expressed ion channels.

1556

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

Adult Neuron Subtype Transcription Factor
Patterns Are Largely Established by E17.5

In mice, CHATþ and NOS1þ enteric neurons are iden-
tiﬁable by late gestation and appear lineage committed.30,31
To identify lineage speciﬁc transcription factors at E17.5, we
performed RNA-seq using whole bowel from ChAT-L10a-

EGFP wt/wt; Nos1-CreERT2Cre/wt;TdTomatoþ and ChAT-L10a-
EGFPþ; Nos1-CreERT2wt/wt;TdTomatoþ littermates after
E15.5 tamoxifen treatment. In these mice, EGFP marks
CHAT-lineage and TDTOMATO identiﬁes NOS1-lineage
neurons (Figure 9A–C; see also Supplementary Figure 2).29
These lineages were chosen to minimize the presence of

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1557

less-differentiated precursors in the sample and were
sequenced together. A total of 1005 cells were sequenced at
83% saturation. We normalized after removing outliers,
leaving 707 neurons (Elavl4þ), 179 epithelial (Epcamþ),
and 67 smooth muscle cells (Actg2þ) (Figure 9A and D).
Reclustering without epithelia and muscle yielded 8 neuron
clusters (Figure 9E and F). All had high Ret expression and
expressed Dcx, an immature neuron marker.32 Enteric glia
(Plp1þ, Sox10þ) were rare (Figure 9H). Chat transcripts
were also rare as others reported,5,8 but vesicular acetyl-
choline transporter Slc18a3 was abundant in neuron clus-
ters with low Nos1 (Figure 9G). Three clusters appeared less
mature, prominently expressing neurite projection and
cytoskeleton reorganization genes, based on Gene Ontology
(GO) analysis. Other clusters expressed synaptogenesis and
maintenance genes suggesting mature neurons (Figure 10A
and B). Many neurotransmitters, receptors,
ion channel
subunits, and signaling molecules were differentially
expressed between E17.5 subgroups (Figures 10C–E and
11), including Gfra1 and Gfra2 (Figure 11), and there was
substantial overlap between E17.5 and adult subgroup
expression of regulatory genes including Casz1, Bnc2, Etv1,
Pbx3, Tbx2, Tbx3, and Rbfox1, a subset of which were vali-
dated using immunohistochemistry (Figures 7, 8, 12, and
13). Similar to our adult data, we also validated Etv1
enrichment in NOS1þ neurons by treating Etv1-CreERT2Cre/wt;
R26R-TdTomato mice with high-dose tamoxifen to induce
TDTOMATO from Etv1þ regulatory elements (Figure 13A, G,
and M).

Conditional Tbx3 Loss Reduced NOS1þ
Myenteric Neuron Density, But Casz1, Tbx2, and
Rbfox1 Loss Did Not Alter Chat-EGFPþ/Total
Neuron Subtype Ratios

For several differentially expressed regulatory genes, we
determined if mutations altered nitrergic or cholinergic

in

Rbfox1

enteric neuron abundance. We found that loss of TBX3 in
ENS led to w30% fewer NOS1þ neurons in small bowel of
P0 Wnt1-Cre;Tbx3ﬂ/ﬂ;R26R-Tdtomato mice, despite normal
total neuron density (Figure 14A–D). In contrast, Chat-
EGFPþ neuron density was normal in Casz1 mutants (Wnt1-
Cre;Casz1ﬂ/ﬂ;Chat-EGFP-L10A),
mutants
(Wnt1-Cre;Rbfox1ﬂ/ﬂ;Chat-EGFP-L10A), and in Tbx2 mutants
(Wnt1-Cre;Tbx2ﬂ/ﬂ;Chat-EGFP-L10A) despite enrichment of
these genes in cholinergic neurons (Figure 14E–H, K–N, and
R–U). Colonic bead expulsion latency tests were also normal
in adult Casz1 (Figure 14I) and Rbfox1 (Figure 14O) mutant
mice, suggesting intact ENS-mediated distal colon motility.
We were unable to perform similar motility experiments in
Tbx2 mutant mice, which died shortly after birth. Collec-
tively, these ﬁndings suggest TBX3 impacts NOS1þ neurons,
but conditional loss of Tbx2, Casz1, and Rbfox1 does not
alter CHAT/NOS1 neuron numbers.

Pou3f3 Is in Colon, But Not Small Bowel ENS

In addition to subtype identity, regional differences in
neurons could promote distinct motility patterns. We were
intrigued by the observation that Pou3f3 (aka Brn1), a tran-
scription factor important for CNS development, was mostly
restricted to E17.5 immature Chat2 and immature Nos1
clusters (Figure 15A and B). Pou3f3 enrichment in colon ENS
could explain these results, a hypthesis conﬁrmed by RT-PCR
(Figure 15AY). Immunohistochemistry using 2 antibodies
conﬁrmed POU3F3 marks all immature and mature colon
neurons, but no small bowel neurons (Figure 15C–Z), as
recently reported.33 Human colon also had POU3F3 in the
nucleus of all submucosal and myenteric neurons. Human
small bowel submucosal neurons lacked POU3F3, but some
small bowel myenteric neurons had cytoplasmic POU3F3
immunoreactivity of uncertain signiﬁcance (Figure 15AA–AX).
These data signiﬁcantly extend recent reports that colon, but
not small bowel, enteric neurons express POU3F3.

Figure 5. (See previous page). GDNF and NRTN acutely inﬂuence GCaMP activity of largely nonoverlapping adult distal
colon myenteric neuron populations. (A–C) Feature plots show Gfra1 primarily in Nos1/Vip/Gal neurons (A), Gfra2 in Chat
neurons (B), and Ret in almost all neurons except Chat3 (C). (D) Whole mount immunohistochemistry shows GFP (green) in
most NOS1þ (red) neurons of Gfra1Gfp/wt distal colon. White arrowheads show GFPþNOS1þ neurons. Yellow arrowhead
shows GFP-NOS1þ neuron. (E) Most NOS1þ neurons are GFPþ. Most NOS1– neurons are GFP-, consistent with RNA-seq
(P < .0001, Student’s t test, n ¼ 3 mice (Gfra1Gfp/wt)). (F) Whole mount immunohistochemistry using Gfra1Gfp/wt distal colon
shows colocalization of GFP (green) with S100Bþ (red) glia and HuC/D (blue) neurons. Scale bar ¼ 100 mm. (G, H) Time-lapse
images (top) (pixels were assigned color based on transients timing; color ¼ activity) and traces (bottom) of GCaMP6s activity
from regions of interest on myenteric neurons during baseline (left) and after adding 10 nM GDNF (G) or 10 nM NRTN (H) (right).
(I) Sample traces from neurons with activity increased (top) or decreased (bottom) by GDNF (red) or NRTN (blue). Baseline
(gray) and percent neurons (in parentheses) with increased or decreased activity (>2 SD change). (J) Percent neurons
responding to only GDNF (red), only NRTN (blue), or both (gray) (P < .05, 1-way analysis of variance, Tukey’s multiple
comparisons test). (K) Iris plot of GDNF and NRTN responsive myenteric neurons (n ¼ 260 of 523 [49.7%] of total). GDNF is
shown in the outer circle (red), NRTN is shown in the inner circle (blue) (n ¼ 5 mice), and gray indicates no ligand-induced
activity change. Light shades of red and blue indicate decreased activity after ligand addition. Most responsive neurons are
affected by either GDNF or NRTN, not both. (L) NADPH diaphorase stained colon identiﬁes nitric oxide–producing neurons. (M)
Corresponding GCaMP6s imaging ﬁeld. (N) GCaMP6s imaging ﬁeld shown in M, where yellow arrowheads identify putative
nitrergic myenteric neurons and asterisks indicate putative NADPH diaphorase positive neurons with low GCaMP6s signal. (O)
Quantiﬁcation of GDNF- and NRTN-responsive nitrergic neurons (n ¼ 3 ﬁelds from separate experiments, P ¼ .0298, Fisher
exact test, 2 (cid:2) 2 contingency table [NOSþ/NOS– and GDNF response/NRTN response]). (P, Q) Quantitative data for
GCaMP6s imaging ﬁelds stained post hoc for NADPH diaphorase, indicating response to GDNF and NRTN. (P) Responsive
nitrergic neurons. (Q) Responsive non-nitrergic neurons. (E, J) Mean ± SD. (D, F, G, H) Scale bar ¼ 100 mm. (L–Q) n ¼ 3 ﬁelds of
view from separate mice. *P < .05, **P < .01, ****P < .0001.

1558

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

GDNF

Figure 6. GDNF modu-
lates activity in some
myenteric neurons and
enhances colon muscu-
laris movement.
(A, B)
Heatmaps of GCaMP6s
activity before and after
adding TTX and during
sequential
and
NRTN addition. Colors
indicate GCaMP6s ampli-
tude (red, no activity). (A)
Heatmap of all neurons
(n ¼ 803 from 7 ﬁelds of
view in 3 mice). Dotted box
shows GDNF- and NRTN-
responsive neurons.
(B)
Expanded heatmap of 34
neurons that were only
20
GDNF-responsive,
NRTN-
only
neurons
responsive, and 12 neu-
rons that
responded to
both. (C–J) Percent of total
neurons
observed
per
imaging ﬁeld
GCaMP6s
with increased activity after
EFS applied 5 mm (C, E)
oral or (D, F) aboral relative
to the imaging ﬁeld at
baseline (vehicle) and in
the presence of
(C, D)
GDNF and (E, F) NRTN. (C,)
GDNF
the
percent of activated neu-
rons after orally applied
EFS (P ¼ .0068,
ratio
paired t test). (G–J) Tissue
displacement
(microme-
ters) after EFS applied 5
(H, J)
I) oral or
mm (G,
aboral relative to the im-
aging ﬁeld at baseline
(vehicle) and in the pres-
ence of (G, H) GDNF and
(G) Tissue
(I, J) NRTN.
displacement is increased
in the presence of GDNF
after orally applied EFS
(P ¼ .0230, ratio paired t
test). Sample traces (left)
and graph (right) of tissue
displacement at baseline
and after (K) GDNF (P ¼
.0022, ratio paired t test) or
(L) NRTN (P ¼ .1583, ratio
paired t test).
(M) GDNF,
but not NRTN, enhanced
tissue movement (P < .01,
unpaired t test). (M) Mean
± SD. *P < .05, **P < .01,
****P < .0001.

increases

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1559

Figure 7. Average expres-
sion and percent cells per
cluster with detectable
differentially
of
levels
expressed
transcription
and splicing factors in
adult distal mouse colon.
(A)
and
Transcription
splicing factors with known
roles in ENS development
(top), and newly identiﬁed
differentially expressed fac-
tors (bottom). (B) Proportion
of cells per cluster with
expression values >0 for
transcription and splicing
factors with known roles in
ENS development (top), and
regulatory genes (transcrip-
tion factors and splicing
factors) newly identiﬁed in
the ENS in this study (bot-
tom). n.s., not signiﬁcantly
differentially expressed be-
tween neuron clusters.

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

Using Pou3f3 to mark E17.5 colon neurons (Figure 15AZ)
and restricting comparisons to only mature or immature
clusters, we identiﬁed 5 genes differentially expressed in
Pou3f3þ vs Pou3f3- enteric neurons of immature clusters
(Slc18a3, Klhl1, Dpysl3, Gna14, and Itm2a) (Figure 15BA and
BC) and 3 genes differentially expressed in Pou3f3þ vs Pou3f3-
neurons of mature clusters (Ahr, Pantr1, Zfhx3) (Figure 15BB
and BD). Ahr, Pantr1, and Zfhx3 patterns resemble Pou3f3
(Pearson correlation) (compare Figure 15B–BD), and others
recently reported Ahr enrichment in colon ENS.33

Adult Human Colon Myenteric Plexus

We next sequenced single nuclei from human colon
myenteric plexus and surrounding cells. Isolating ENS cells
was challenging. Neither whole cell sequencing nor immu-
noselection of neuronal nuclei using NeuN or PHOX2B an-
tibodies was successful. Ultimately, we obtained data from a
limited number of human colon myenteric neuron nuclei by
microdissecting live plexus labeled with 4-Di-2-Asp (4-(4-
(dimethylamino)styryl)-N-methylpyridinium iodide) (a dye
terminal
that

accumulates

presynaptic

nerve

in

1560

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

freezing in optimal cutting
mitochondria) (Figure 16A),
temperature compound (OCT), sectioning, Dounce homog-
enizing, and ﬂow sorting Hoechstþ single nuclei from cell

debris. 10x Genomics (Figure 16B) yielded RNA-seq data
from 20,167 nuclei of 16 adult colons (Table 2) with a mean
of 1455 UMIs and 894 genes per nucleus (Table 3). Our data

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1561

included many smooth muscle, ICC, PDGFRaþ cells, enteric
glia, muscularis macrophage, and vascular endothelial and
hematopoietic cells (Figure 16B–L) (ie, most cells that
impact bowel motility). One cluster of 48 cells was strongly
positive for neuronal genes like ELAVL4, SNAP25, and
UCHL1 (Figure 17D–F). Reclustering all human nuclei
expressing ELAVL4, UCHL1, or SNAP25 led to unbiased
identiﬁcation of this same group, plus other cells that are
likely doublets, conﬁrming neuron identity of this group
(Figure 18A and B). Because of small cell numbers, we used
hierarchical Euclidean clustering based on the top 50
markers distinguishing neurons from other cells. This gave
2 distinct clusters (Figure 18C) that differ in NOS1/VIP/
GALþ expression. CHAT and SLC18A3 (VAChT) transcripts
were not detected in either subgroup, probably due to low
read depth. Low CHAT was also noted by others.5,8 We next
asked if any of the 41 transcription or splicing factors
differentially expressed in mouse Nos1þ vs Chatþ myen-
teric neurons were also differentially expressed in human
myenteric neuron subtypes. Consistent with mouse data,
ETV1 was most abundant in NOS1þ neurons, while RBFOX1
and BNC2 were enriched in NOS1– neurons (Figure 18D)
after multiple comparison testing. Immunohistochemistry
conﬁrmed BNC2 (Figure 19A–D and U), PBX3 (Figure 19E–H
and V), RBFOX1 (Figure 19I–L and W), TBX2 (Figure 19M–P
and X), and TBX3 (Figure 19Q–T and Y) were differentially
expressed in human enteric neuron subtypes, with patterns
similar to mouse (ie, most RBFOX1þ, PBX3þ, BNC2þ, and
TBX2þ cells are CHATþ; most TBX3þ cells are NOSþ)
(Figure 19Z and AA).

Discussion

Regenerative medicine and trophic factor modulation
hold promise for treating life-threatening enteric neuropa-
thies.2,3 To facilitate reprogramming and improve bowel
function, better understanding of the molecular identity and
characteristics of ENS subtypes is needed.2 We used single-
cell transcriptomics to identify hundreds of neurotransmit-
ters, receptors,
ion channels, signaling molecules, and
messenger RNA regulatory genes differentially expressed in
7 mouse myenteric neuron subclasses in adult distal colon
and 8 neuron groups at E17.5.
Immunohistochemistry
validated RNA-seq, and functional studies identiﬁed new

ENS roles for TBX3, GDNF, and NRTN. Our analyses com-
plement recently published manuscripts,5–8,33 providing a
foundation for novel diagnostics and disease management.
Several transcription and splicing factors were differ-
entially expressed in nitrergic vs cholinergic neurons, with
similar patterns in mouse and human RNA-seq (ETV1,
RBFOX1, BNC2) and immunohistochemistry (BNC2, PBX3,
RBFOX1, TBX3, and TBX2) data. Some of these genes were
previously reported in Memic et al,4 who used bulk RNA
analysis via microarray and immunohistochemistry to
study transcription factor expression during fetal develop-
ment. However, unlike their study, which lacked the reso-
lution of single-cell sequencing and had no quantitative
assessment of transcription factor expression,4 we provide
rigorous quantitative data by combining immunohisto-
chemistry with 3-dimensional confocal
imaging. For a
subset of genes, we tested if loss altered Chat or Nos1
subtype abundance and discovered that Tbx3 loss reduced
NOS1þ myenteric neuron density. Total neuron density
in Tbx3 mutant mice, conﬁrming our prior
was normal
analysis.27 In that prior study, we also found loss of Tbx3
reduced enteric glia but had no discernible effects on
gastric and small intestine transit time at P0.27 Unfortu-
nately, Tbx3 mutant mice die at P0, which precludes anal-
ysis of colonic or total gastrointestinal transit. Intriguingly,
Tbx3 expression in limb bud is induced by the transcription
factor HAND2,34 and Hand2 mutations cause complete loss
of NOS1þ/VIPþ enteric neurons,35 suggesting TBX3 may
act downstream of HAND2 in the ENS.

In contrast, Chat-EGFPþ neuron density and total
in Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Casz1ﬂ/ﬂ,
neuron density were normal
Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Rbfox1ﬂ/ﬂ, and Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Tbx2ﬂ/ﬂ mice.
Casz1, Rbfox1, and Tbx2 were chosen for in vivo study
because most adult ChATþ myenteric neurons express
Casz1 and Rbfox1, and because Tbx2 was expressed in many
ChATþ neurons at E17.5. Furthermore, RBFOX1 regulates
CNS neuron subtype differentiation, and CASZ1 and TBX2
regulate subtype speciﬁcation in many cells including pho-
toreceptors.36–40 Normal colonic bead expulsion latency in
Casz1 and Rbfox1 mutant mice suggests redundant ENS
mechanisms prevent obvious anatomic or functional defects.
Another striking observation was that the transcription
factor POU3F3 is expressed in colon ENS, but not small
bowel ENS, as others recently conﬁrmed.7,33 POU3F3

(H–L)

Figure 8. (See previous page). Regulatory genes are expressed in distinct adult ENS subsets. (A) Feature plots of select
regulatory genes. Color key shows loge(normalized gene expression). (B–F) Myenteric plexus wholemount immunohisto-
chemistry in young adult ChAT-EGFP-L10A distal colon. (G) Whole mount myenteric plexus immunohistochemistry in distal
colon from tamoxifen-treated Etv1-CreErt2;R26R-TdTomato mice. TDTOMATO is in many NOS1þ neurons and some non-
Immunohistochemistry quantiﬁcation. TBX3 is found mostly in (H) nitrergic
neuronal cells with ICC morphology.
(NOS1þ) neurons (P < .0001, n ¼ 3). (I) SATB1 (P ¼ .013, n ¼ 3), (J) PBX3 (P < .0001, n ¼ 3), and (K) RBFOX1 (P ¼ .0006, n ¼ 3)
are mostly in cholinergic (EGFPþ) neurons, consistent with single-cell RNA data. (L) PHOX2B is equally abundant in Chat-
EGFPþ and Chat-EGFP–cells (P ¼ .2193, n ¼ 4). (M) Quantiﬁcation of G shows that 56.4 ± 3.6% of NOS1þ neurons are
TDTOMATOþ. Only 5.6 ± 0.9% of NOS1– neurons are TDTOMATOþ (P ¼ .0002, n ¼ 3). (N) Cholinergic (Chat-EGFPþ) and (O)
nitrergic (NOS1þ) identity for cells expressing select factors. SATB1 (P ¼ .0022), PBX3 (P ¼ .0026), and RBFOX1 (P ¼ .019) are
largely restricted to cholinergic (Chat-GFPþ) neurons. PHOX2B is present in both cholinergic and noncholinergic neurons (P ¼
.370) (P values compare Transcription factorþEGFPþ/Transcription factorþ vs EGFPþ/Total neuron ratios). TBX3 (P < .0001)
and ETV1 (P < .0001) are primarily in nitrergic (NOS1þ) neurons (P values compare Transcription factorþNOS1þ/Transcription
factorþ vs NOS1þ/Total neuron ratios). (I–O) Student’s t test. (H) Analysis of variance with Tukey’s post hoc test. Scale bar ¼
100 mm. ChAT-EGFP-L10A ¼ Chat-EGFP. *P < .05, **P < .01, ***P < .001, ****P < .0001.

1562

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

regulates cortical neuron migration and neurogenesis, but
ENS function is unknown.41 Human mutations cause intel-
lectual disability, speech delay, autism, epilepsy, craniofacial

anomalies, and cryptorchidism,42 but effects of POU3F3
mutation on bowel function were not reported. Restricted
colon expression is interesting because motility and ENS

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1563

structure differ between colon and small bowel,22 and we
know little about underlying mechanisms.

Human RNA-seq yielded data from 17 NOS1þ and 31
NOS1– myenteric neurons as well as from many other cells
that impact bowel motility. Guided by RNA-seq, we found
that ETV1 was more abundant in human nitrergic neurons,
while RBFOX1 and BNC2 were enriched in non-nitrergic
neurons, suggesting that subtype-speciﬁc genes may be
conserved between humans and mice. Immunohistochem-
istry conﬁrmed that TBX3, PBX3, and TBX2 are also present
in subsets of human enteric neurons as predicted by mouse
data.

Many other genes differentially expressed in enteric
neuron subclasses may merit investigation. For example,
ZEB2 mutations cause Mowat-Wilson syndrome, charac-
terized by HSCR,
intellectual disability, and distinctive
facial
features. Postsurgical outcomes in Mowat-Wilson
syndrome are worse than for isolated HSCR, and ZEB2
mutations cause chronic constipation without HSCR,43,44
suggesting that Zeb2 might have roles beyond bowel
colonization by ENS precursors. Zfhx3, another HSCR-
associated gene,45 drives neuronal differentiation in other
in ENS subtype speciﬁcation are
regions, but
unexplored.

roles

Integrating New and Old Data About ENS
Subtypes

Using neurotransmitter-associated markers in adults
(Table 4) and at E17.5 (Table 5), we correlated our RNA-
seq data with known ENS subtype markers. Subtype des-
ignations at E17.5 include small bowel and colon neurons
(distinguished by Pou3f3) and immature clusters deﬁned
by GO term modules (Figure 10A and B). The similarities
between the E17.5 small bowel and adult colon suggest
that some aspects of neuron differentiation are similar
across bowel regions and completed by E17.5. Many newly
identiﬁed differentially expressed genes are highlighted in
Tables 4 and 5. Some genes known to be expressed in
enteric neuron subtypes were not detected (see Table 4),
but lack of expression is difﬁcult to interpret because of
limited read depth in adult colon nuclei.

In adults, Calcb neurons appear to be AH/Dogiel type II
intrinsic sensory neurons that express neuroﬁlament M
(Nefm), Nav1.9 (Scn11.1a), calretinin (Calb2), NK1 tachy-
kinin receptor (Tacr1), serotonin receptors Htr3A and

excitatory motor neurons or

Htr3b, and purine receptor P2rx2.18,46,47 Chat1 neurons
express the mechanosensitive channel Piezo1, suggesting
that these cells are stretch sensitive intrinsic sensory
neurons, but other sensory neuron markers are absent.
There are reports of mechanosensitive interneurons and
motor neurons,48 so Chat1 neurons may correspond to
these. Tac1 and Penk coexpression make Chat2 and Chat3
clusters
interneurons
(Figure 1I).18 Unexpectedly, however, Chat3 neurons also
express hepatocyte growth factor receptor Met and do not
express calcitonin gene-related peptide (Calcb). This is an
interesting ﬁnding, which suggests that Metþ colonic
neurons differ from small bowel, where MET and calci-
tonin gene-related peptide were found in the same neu-
rons
single-cell
sequencing.49,50 Similar to small bowel, however, Met
and Ret appear to be mutually exclusive in colon, with all
groups except Chat3 expressing Ret. Finally, Chat4 cells
appear to be interneurons based on coexpression of
Slc18a3, Chat, Nos1, Vip, and Calb1. Many ﬁndings ﬁt well
with known neuron subtypes, and immunohistochemistry
correlates well with RNA-seq, providing high conﬁdence in
our results. We point out unexpected ﬁndings to suggest
that there is more to learn and that future studies based
on our RNA-seq are needed to fully deﬁne adult enteric
neuron subtypes.

immunohistochemistry

and

by

Deﬁning neuron subtypes at E17.5 presents an added
challenge because differentiation is incomplete. Table 5
highlights
some markers differentially expressed in
neuron subtypes. Because almost all cholinergic and
nitrergic neurons at E17.5 remain cholinergic or nitrergic,
respectively, in adults,30,31 we extrapolate from adult data.
Assessment of maturity is based on GO term analysis.
Colon neurons were identiﬁed by Pou3f3 expression. Chat
cluster 1 and Chat cluster 2 markers suggest small bowel
excitatory motor neurons and intrinsic sensory neurons,
respectively. Chat cluster 2 also expresses bone morpho-
genetic protein (BMP) and transforming growth factor b
signaling antagonists (Nog, Bambi, Smad7), which may
provide new insights into ENS development. Immature
Chat cluster 1 appears to be developing myenteric in-
terneurons that express Slc17a6, similar to the adult Chat4
cluster. Nos1 clusters 1 and 3 are most likely inhibitory
motor neurons but could also be interneurons. Nos1
cluster 2 represents possible inhibitory interneurons

Figure 9. (See previous page). Single-cell RNA-seq of E17.5 ChAT-EGFP-L10AD and Nos1-CreERT2Cre/wt;R26R-
TdTomatoD neurons show distinct nitrergic and cholinergic clusters. (A) RNA-seq workﬂow with t-SNE plot of all cell
groups isolated from E17.5 bowel. (B) ChAT-EGP (green) and NOS1 (red) do not overlap at E17.5. Scale bar ¼ 50 mm. (C) NOS1
(green) and nNOS-Cre-ERT2;R26R-tdTomato (red) overlap. (D) Feature plots of Acta2 as smooth muscle marker, Epcam as an
intestinal epithelial marker, and Elavl4 as a pan-neuronal marker. Color key represents loge(normalized gene expression). (E)
After removing the epithelial and smooth muscle cells from the dataset and reclustering, t-SNE plot reveals multiple neuron
subpopulations. (F) Violin plots show subgroups had 25,319.7 ± 5562.2 unique RNA transcripts (UMIs) and 5291.6 ± 558.8
detected genes (nGenes) per cell. (G) Expression of Nos1 and the cholinergic marker Slc18a3/VachT veriﬁes the presence of
the expected cholinergic and nitergic neuronal subpopulations. Chat expression was low throughout, but overlapped with
Slc18a3 expression. Color key represents loge(normalized gene expression). (H) All neurons have high expression of pan-
neuronal markers Tubb3 and Elavl4. There is minimal contamination with glial cells based on the expression of enteric glial
marker Plp1. Sox10, which marks enteric glia and enteric neural crest precursors was also low. Ret, which is expressed in ENS
precursors and many neurons, was present in all clusters, and all neurons still express the immature pan-neuronal marker Dcx.
This suggests that these cells are lineage-restricted immature neurons.

1564

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

based on the expression of the transcription factor Neu-
rod6.5 Interestingly, Nos1 cluster 1 differentially ex-
presses Ednrb, but the role of Ednrb/EDN3 signaling at

this time is not known. We highlight these observations to
emphasize how mining our data might provide new insight
into development.

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1565

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

Figure 11. Average expression and percent cells per cluster with detectable levels of differentially expressed signaling
pathway molecules in E17.5 mouse bowel. (A) Average expression of differentially expressed signaling pathway genes for
distinct neuron clusters. Color key represents loge(normalized average gene expression within each cluster). (B) Proportion of
cells per cluster with expression values >0 for differentially expressed signaling pathway molecules.

GDNF and NRTN Acutely Affect Calcium
Signaling in Distinct Adult Enteric Neuron
Populations

GDNF/GFRA1/RET signaling is essential for ENS pre-
cursor survival, proliferation, and differentiation during
gestation and early ENS maturation.28 In adult ENS, GDNF
increases the strength of bowel contraction in the
ascending limb of the peristaltic response.25 Here, we
conﬁrm and extend prior observations by showing GDNF
alters calcium signaling in some colon neurons and acutely

In
enhances basal and EFS-evoked motor patterns.
contrast, although NRTN/GFRA2/RET are known to in-
ﬂuence bowel motility and support acetylcholinesteraseþ
and SPþ neurites,23,51 acute effects of NRTN on the ENS or
bowel motility had not been demonstrated. We found that
Gfra1 and Gfra2,
the preferred GDNF and NRTN co-
receptors, respectively, are expressed in largely nonover-
lapping Retþ E17.5 and adult myenteric neuron groups.
GFRA1 is in w90% of NOS1þ myenteric neurons, but very
few NOS1– neurons, so we anticipated GDNF would affect

Figure 10. (See previous page). GO term analysis of differentially expressed genes in E17.5 bowel shows more
immature and mature neuron clusters, with unique combinations of neurotransmitters, receptors, and ion channels. (A)
GO term analysis of differentially expressed genes in the 3 more immature neuron clusters (immature Chat cluster 1, immature
Chat cluster 2, immature Nos1 cluster) compared with all other clusters indicates that these neurons are actively involved in
cytoskeletal reorganization and neurite extension. (B) GO term analysis of differentially expressed genes in the 5 more mature
neuron clusters (Chat cluster 1, Chat cluster 2, Nos1 cluster 1, Nos1 cluster 2, and Nos1 cluster 3) compared with the
immature clusters (immature Chat cluster 1, immature Chat cluster 2, and immature Nos1 cluster) indicates that these neurons
are actively involved in synapse formation. (C–E) Average expression (left) and proportion of cells per cluster (right) with
expression values >0 (right) for neurotransmitters and commonly used (C) immunohistochemistry markers, (D) neurotrans-
mitter receptors, and (E) ion channels for different 17.5 groups. Color key for left panels represents loge(normalized average
gene expression within each cluster). (C) Asterisk indicates differential expression across neuron subtypes. (D, E) Genes listed
are differentially expressed across subtypes. imm, immature.

1566

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

primarily NOS1þ neurons. However, 44% (n ¼ 33 of 75)
of GDNF-inﬂuenced neurons were non-nitrergic. This
might occur because GDNF activates RET via GFRA2

(NRTN’s preferred co-receptor) at high (pharmacologic)
concentrations,52–54 but
this seems unlikely because
GCaMP6s signaling was altered by both GDNF and NRTN

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1567

in only 8% of myenteric neurons. Instead, the observation
that some neurons had increased and others decreased
GCaMP activity in response to each trophic factor suggests
that both direct and indirect effects were measured and
that responses depend on synaptic inputs, as conﬁrmed by
TTX data. The hypothesis that GDNF and NRTN sensitize
responsive neurons to incoming stimuli is also supported
by our prior studies of dorsal root ganglia, where these
factors acutely potentiate TRPV1-induced calcium signals
and induce hyperalgesia when injected into hindpaw.55
Although we do not know the source of calcium (eg,
intra- or extracellular) or whether evoked GCaMP signals
were activity dependent, our data collectively show that
NRTN and GDNF acutely inﬂuence nonoverlapping sets of
myenteric neurons and differentially regulate bowel
motility. These new data may in part explain our prior
studies showing that Nrtn–/–, Gfra1(cid:3), and Ret(cid:3) mice have
normal numbers of enteric neurons, but a >90% reduction
in colon contractility and a 50%–90% (depending on
mouse line) reduction in VIP and SP release in response to
electric ﬁeld stimulation.56

Summary

Enteric neuropathies remain challenging to treat, and we
are hampered by inadequate data about enteric neuron
subtypes. Here, we used single-cell RNA-seq to identify
many subtype–speciﬁc regulatory molecules, and demon-
strated new roles for GDNF, NRTN, and Tbx3.

Materials and Methods

All authors had access to the study data and reviewed

and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.

Study Approval

Studies adhere to ARRIVE (Animals

in Research:
Reporting In Vivo Experiments) guidelines.57 Mouse exper-
iments were performed in accordance with Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) approval from
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (IACUC#19-001041) and
University of Pittsburgh (IACUC#IS00013297) or University
of Melbourne Animal Experimentation Ethics Committee
(project number 1714308.2). Human colon was acquired
with institutional review board (IRB) approval from Perel-
man School of Medicine at University of Pennsylvania
(IRB#804376) and from Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia
(IRB#13-010357).

Animals

to

to

to

to

as

as

as

as

mice

mice

(referred

(referred

(referred

(referred

B6.FVB(Cg)-Tg(Chat-EGFP/Rpl10a,Slc18a3)DW167Htz/J mice,
referred to as ChAT-EGFP-L10a (RRID:IMSR_JAX:030250;
C57BL/6J), were a kind gift from Dr Joseph Dougherty at
Washington University School of Medicine in St Louis.
Tbx3;
Tbx3tm3.1Moon
RRID:MGI:5538564; described previously; mixed back-
ground)22 were a kind gift from Dr. Anne Moon at the
Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine. B6.129S2-
Rbfox1;
Rbfox1tm1.1Dblk/J mice
RRID:IMSR_JAX:014089; C57BL6/J) were a kind gift from
Dr. Douglas Black at
the University of California, Los
Angeles. Gfra1tm2.1Jmi mice (referred to as Gfra1-Gfp;
RRID:MGI:3715157, C57BL/6) were a kind gift of Dr. Sanjay
Jain at Washington University School of Medicine in St Louis.
C57BL/6J mice (RRID:IMSR_JAX:000664), H2az2(Tg(Wnt1-
cre)11Rth
Wnt1-Cre;
RRID:IMSR_JAX:003829), B6;129S6-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(CAG-
tdTomato*,-EGFP*)Ees/J mice (referred to as ROSAnT-nG;
RRID:IMSR_JAX:023035),
B6;129S-Gt(ROSA)
26Sortm1.1Ksvo/J mice (referred to as R26R-H2b-mCherry;
RRID:IMSR_JAX:023139), B6(Cg)-Etv1tm1.1(cre/ERT2)Zjh/J
RRI-
mice
D:IMSR_JAX:013048), Slc17a6tm2(cre)Lowl/J mice (referred
to
as Vglut2-IRES-Cre mice; RRID:IMSR_JAX:016963),
B6;129S-Nos1tm1.1(cre/ERT2)Zjh/J mice (referred to as
Nos1-CreERT2;
Gt(ROSA)
26Sortm9(CAGtdTomato)Hze mice (referred to as R26R-
TdTomato; RRID:IMSR_JAX:007909), B6.FVB-Tg(EIIa-cre)
E2a-Cre
C5379Lmgd/J
RRI-
D:IMSR_JAX:003724;
B6J.Cg-Gt(ROSA)
(referred to R26R-
26Sortm96(CAG-GCaMP6s)Hze/MwarJ
Gcamp6s; RRID:IMSR_JAX:028866; C57BL/6) were obtained
from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Wnt1-Cre
mice on a mixed C57BL/6J (cid:2) CBA/J)F1 background were
bred into R26R-H2b-mCherry mice on a mixed 129S4/
SvJaeSor (cid:2) C57BL/6J background and maintained on a
mixed C57BL/6J (cid:2) 129S4/SvJaeSor (cid:2) CBA/J)F1 back-
ground. Etv1-CreERT2 mice were bred to R26R-TdTomato
mice
to generate Etv1-
CreERT2;R26R-TdTomato mice on a C57BL/6J background.
Vglut2-IRES-Cre mice
C57BL/6;FVB;129S6
on
background were bred to R26R-TdTomato on a C57BL/6J
background
a mixed C57BL/
6;FVB;129S6 background. Nos1-CreERT2 mice were crossed
with R26R-TdTomato mice and ChAT-EGFP-L10a mice to
generate ChAT-EGFP-L10a; Nos1-CreERT2; R26R-TdTomato

and ChAT-EGFP-L10a mice

RRID:IMSR_JAX:014541),

to
C57BL/6),

Etv1-CreERT2 mice;

and maintained

(referred

as
and

on

a

Figure 12. (See previous page). Differentially expressed transcription and splicing factors in E17.5 mouse bowel. (A)
Transcription and splicing factors with known roles in ENS development (top), and newly identiﬁed differentially expressed
factors (bottom). (B) Proportion of cells per cluster with expression values >0 for transcription and splicing factors with known
roles in ENS development (top), and regulatory genes (transcription factors and splicing factors) newly identiﬁed in the ENS in
this study (bottom). (C–G) Whole mount immunohistochemistry of select regulatory genes in E17.5 ChAT-EGFP-L10A reporter
mouse mid colon shows gene localization in neuron subsets. (C) BNC2, (D) PBX3, and (E) RBFOX1 are predominantly
expressed in cholinergic (EGFPþ) neurons. (C, D) White arrowheads indicate neurons that express the regulatory gene in
question but are not cholinergic. (F) TBX2 does not have nuclear or diffuse cytoplasmic staining in the E17.5 colon. Instead,
TBX2 immunoreactive cytoplasmic aggregates were detected in a subset of cholinergic (EGFPþ) neurons (notched white
arrowheads). (G) TBX3 is expressed in some cholinergic (EGFPþ, white arrows) and most nitrergic (NOS1þ, empty arrow-
heads) neurons. (C–G) ChAT-EGFP-L10A reporter ¼ Chat-EGFP. Scale bar ¼ 20 mm (C–G). n.s., not signiﬁcantly differentially
expressed between neuron clusters.

1568

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

and maintained on a C57BL/6 background.
mice
Rbfox1;Wnt1-Cre;R26R-TdTomato;ChAT-EGFP-L10a
mice
were generated by crossing Rbfox1 mice to Wnt1-Cre mice,
ChAT-EGFP-L10a mice, and R26R-TdTomato mice and were

maintained on a mixed background. Wnt1-Cre;Tbx3 mice
were generated by crossing Wnt1-Cre mice to Tbx3 mice and
were maintained on a mixed background. E2a-Cre mice
were crossed with R26R-Gcamp6s mice to generate mice

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1569

that express GCaMP6s (a genetically encoded calcium indi-
cator) in all cells. E2a-Cre;R26R-GCaMP6s mice were main-
tained on a pure C57BL/6 background. Genotyping was
performed using previously published and novel primers
(Table 6) and by Transnetyx (Cordova, TN). Vaginal plug
day was considered day E0.5. Experimental animals of the
correct strain, genotype, and age were randomly selected
from the total pool of mice available Animal husbandry in-
formation can be found in Table 7.

syringe to remove luminal contents, and placed in fresh
cold, sterile DPBS. Colon was carefully cut along the mes-
entery, pinned mucosal side down on dishes treated with
Sylgard Elastomer 184 Silicone Encapsulant Clear (Dow
Corning, Midland, MI). Muscularis was carefully peeled from
the mucosa and placed in cold OCT compound (Fisher
Healthcare Tissue-Plus OCT Compound; Thermo-Fisher
Scientiﬁc, Hampton, NH; Cat. #23-730-571) in a biopsy
specimen cryomold (VWR, Radnor, PA; Cat. #4565), frozen
in methylbutane on dry ice, and stored at –80(cid:4)C.

Human Colon

Colon tissue was acquired using the Abramson Cancer
Center Tumor Bank (Philadelphia, PA). Colon was de-
identiﬁed, providing limited clinical data. Resected co-
lons were maintained at ambient
temperature until
arrival in pathology, where they were transferred to ice-
cold
saline
(DPBS) 1–4 hours after resection. Pathologists selected
regions of colon without gross abnormalities, and colon
specimens were transferred to the laboratory in DPBS on
ice.

Dulbecco-modiﬁed

phosphate-buffered

Tamoxifen Treatment

Tamoxifen (10 mg/mL or 20 mg/mL; Sigma-Aldrich, St
Louis, MO; Cat. #T5648) was prepared by ﬁrst adding 200
mL ethanol and then 1800 mL sunﬂower oil (Sigma-Aldrich;
Cat. #S5007). Tamoxifen was dissolved by alternately vor-
texing and incubating in a 37(cid:4)C water bath. Nos1-
creERT2;Chat-EGFP-L10A;R26-TdTomato E15.5 dams were
injected once with 200-mg/kg tamoxifen at 10-mg/mL
concentration. Etv1-CreERT2;R26-TdTomato E15.5 dams
were gavaged once with tamoxifen at 200-mg/kg concen-
tration at 20-mg/mL concentration, and pups were
dissected at E17.5. Adult Etv1-CreERT2;R26-TdTomato adult
mice were gavaged twice (2 days apart) with 233-mg/kg
tamoxifen at 20-mg/mL concentration 3 weeks prior to
dissection.

Preparing Adult Human Colon for Nuclei Isolation

Using insect pins (Fine Science Tools, Foster City, CA;
Cat. #26002-20), colons were maximally stretched and
pinned serosa side up on 30-mm dishes treated with
Sylgard Elastomer 184. Tissue was incubated in 9 parts
carboxygenated (95% oxygen, 5% CO2) Krebs-Ringer so-
lution (118-mM NaCl [Sigma-Aldrich; Cat. #S6191], 4.6-
mM KCl [Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; Cat. #BP366-500], 2.5-
mM CaCl2 [Cat. #C7902], 1.2-mM MgSO4 [Sigma-Aldrich;
Cat. #M-7506], 1-mM NaH2PO4
[Sigma-Aldrich; Cat.
#S0751], 11-mM D-(þ)-Glucose [Sigma-Aldrich; Cat. #G-
7021], 25-mM NaHCO3 [Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; Cat.
#BP328-500], pH 7.4) and 1 part 4-Dia-2-Asp (4-(4-
(dimethylamino)styryl)-N-methylpyridinium
iodide)
(Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Cat. #ab145266) at
room temperature in sterile DPBS. After 10 minutes, the
tissue was transferred to ice-cold carboxygenated Krebs-
Ringers solution under a SteREO Discovery.V20 ﬂuores-
cence dissecting scope (ZEISS, Oberkochen, Germany; 488-
nm ﬁlter). Fluorescent ENS was carefully dissected from
muscularis by peeling away longitudinal muscle strips
with Dumont #5 forceps (Fine Science Tools; Cat. #11251-
30), placed in cold OCT compound (Fisher Healthcare
Tissue-Plus OCT Compound; Cat. #23-730-571) in a biopsy
specimen cryomold (VWR; Cat. #4565), frozen in methyl-
butane (Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; Cat. #O3551-4) on dry
ice, and stored at –80(cid:4)C.

Preparing Young Adult Mouse Colon for Nuclei
Isolation

Wnt1-CreCre/wt;R26R-H2b-mCherryþ 47–52-day-old mice
(8 females, 1 male) were euthanized with CO2. Colon was
removed, ﬂushed with cold, sterile DPBS using a 20-mL

RNA Extraction for RNA Integrity Number
Assessment Prior to Sequencing

One to 3 days before sequencing, frozen mouse or hu-
man tissues were sectioned on a Microm HM 505 E Cryostat

Figure 13. (See previous page). E17.5 data show many regulatory genes are differentially expressed in patterns
resembling adult colon myenteric plexus. (A) Feature plots. Colors show loge (normalized gene expression). (B–F) Whole
mount immunohistochemistry of E17.5 ChAT-EGFP-L10A mid small intestine. (G) Whole mount myenteric plexus immuno-
intestine from tamoxifen-treated Etv1-CreErt2;R26R-TdTomato mice. TDTOMATO is
histochemistry of E17.5 mid small
expressed in many NOS1– neurons and some NOS1þ neurons. White arrowhead points to a NOS1þTDTOMATOþ neuron.
Scale bar ¼ 50 mm. (H–L) Immunohistochemistry quantiﬁcation. (H) BNC2 (P ¼ .0005, n ¼ 3), (I) PBX3 (P ¼ .0119, n ¼ 3), (J)
RBFOX1 (P ¼ .0012, n ¼ 3), and (K) TBX2 (P < .001, n ¼ 3) are primarily in cholinergic (Chat-GFPþ) neurons. (L) TBX3 (P <
.0001, n ¼ 3, analysis of variance with Tukey’s post hoc test) is primarily in NOS1þ neurons. (M) Quantiﬁcation of G shows
preferential TDTOMATO expression in NOS1þ neurons (P ¼ .0042, n ¼ 3). Quantiﬁcation of (N) cholinergic (Chat-EGFPþ) and
(O) nitrergic (NOS1þ) identity. Neurons expressing BNC2 (P ¼ .0018), PBX3 (P ¼ .0165), RBFOX1 (P < .0001), and TBX2 (P ¼
.0016) are primarily cholinergic (Chat-GFPþ)
(P values compare Transcription factorþEGFPþ/Transcription factorþ vs
EGFPþ/Total neuron ratios). TBX3þ neurons (P ¼ .003) are primarily nitrergic (P values compare Transcription factorþNOS1þ/
Transcription factorþ vs NOS1þ/Total neuron ratios). (H–L) Mean ± SD. (B–O) ChAT-EGFP-L10A reporter¼Chat-EGFP. (H–K,
M–O) Student’s t test. (L) Analysis of variance with Tukey’s post hoc test. *P < .05, **P < .01, ***P < .001, ****P < .0001.

1570

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

(GMI, Ramsey, MN; 100-mM sections, –20(cid:4)C). RNA was
extracted from several (n ¼ 1–5) 100-mM sections using the
Qiagen RNeasy Plus Micro kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany; Cat.
#74034) and using Qiagen’s RNase Free DNase Set (Qiagen;

Cat. #79254). Samples were run on an 2100 Agilent Bio-
analyzer using an RNA 6000 Pico Kit (Agilent, Santa Clara,
CA; Cat. #5067-1513), and tissue was used if RNA integrity
number (RIN) was >7.0.

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1571

Nuclei Isolation and Sorting

To isolate nuclei, frozen colon sections (100 mm) in ice-
cold lysis buffer (10-mM Tris HCl pH 7.5 (Cat. #15567-027),
10-mM NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich; Cat. #S6191), 3-mM MgCl2
(Cat. #BP214-500), and 0.005% Nonidet P40 Substitute
(Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; Cat. #AM9010; Sigma-Aldrich;
Cat. #74385) were chopped rapidly with iridectomy scis-
sors (1 minute), transferred to a precooled Dounce ho-
mogenizer (VWR; Cat. #357538) on ice, homogenized 15
strokes with the loose pestle and 40 strokes with the tight
pestle, ﬁltered through MACS SmartStrainer (Miltenyi Bio-
tec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany; Cat. #130-098-458),
centrifuged (590 g, 8 minutes, 4(cid:4)C), and resuspended in
staining buffer (1(cid:2) PBS, 1% w/v Ultrapure bovine serum
albumin [BSA]
[Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA; Cat.
#AM2618], 0.2U/mL Protector RNase inhibitor, [Sigma-
Aldrich; Cat. #3335399001]); 2.5mg/mL Hoechst 33342
Trihydrochloride Trihydrate (Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; Cat.
#H3570) was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 2.5 mg/mL
before ﬁltering (FlowMi strainer; VWR; Cat. #H13680-0040)
and ﬂow sorting (MoFlo Astrios; Beckman Coulter, Indian-
apolis, IN) into 5-mL staining buffer using a 70-mm nozzle to
isolate Hoechstþ/mCherryþ nuclei (mouse) or Hoechstþ
nuclei (human).

Whole Cell Isolation From E17.5 Mice

An E17.5 Nos1-CreERT2;ChAT-L10A-EGFP;R26R-TdTo-
mato dams, tamoxifen treated (200 mg/kg) at E15.5 was
euthanized, and pups were rapidly dissected on ice (2
TdTomatoþ, 3 GFPþ). For RNA-seq, full-length small in-
testines and colon dissociated together were used for RNA-
seq. For RT-PCR, TdTomatoþ E14.5 and E17.5 small intes-
tine and colon from Wnt1-Creþ;R26-TdTomatoþ mice were
analyzed separately. Tissue in carboxygenated 1(cid:2) Hank’s
balanced salt solution (HBSS; Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; Cat.
#14025092) was cut into small pieces with insulin needles,

dissociated with

(Sigma-Aldrich; Cat.
and
Liberase
#5401135001) plus DNase I (0.02 U/mL; Roche, Basel,
Switzerland; Cat. #04716728001), MgCl2 (6 mM; Cat.
#BP214-500), and CaCl2 (1 mM; Cat. #C7902) in HBSS
(37(cid:4)C, 40 minutes) with repeated trituration (P1000).
Dissociated cells were passed 2–3 times through Falcon 35-
mm ﬁlters (Corning, Corning, NY; Cat. #352235), pelleted
(170 g, 3 minutes, 4(cid:4)C) in 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)/
Iscove’s Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium (DMEM)
(Corning; Cat. #10-016-CM), resuspended in ﬂuorescence-
activated cell sorter (FACS) buffer (0.04% w/v BSA
[Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; Cat. #AM2618] in HBSS [Thermo-
Fisher Scientiﬁc; Cat. #14025092]), ﬁltered again, and sor-
ted (BD FACSJazz, 100mm nozzle) into 300-mL FACS buffer
for sequencing. For RT-PCR, tdTomatoþ cells were collected
in 1-mL Iscove’s DMEM/10% FBS, centrifuged (600 g, 5
minutes, 4(cid:4)C) and resuspended in Buffer RLT plus (Qiagen;
Cat. #74034).

Reverse-Transcription Polymerase Chain
Reaction

RNA prepared using RNeasy Plus Micro Kit (Qiagen,
Hilden, Germany; Cat. #74034 and Cat. #79254) or PicoPure
RNA Isolation Kit (Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA;
Cat. #KIT0204) with RIN >7.0 was reverse-transcribed us-
ing Superscript II RNase H (Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; Cat.
#18064022). RT-PCR used KAPA mixture (KAPA Bio-
systems, Wilmington, MA; Cat. #KK7352; Brn1) or GoTaq
Green (Promega, Madison, WI; Cat. #M7122; Casz1) and
previously described primers (Table 8).

Library Generation, Sequencing, and Data
Processing

Libraries prepared with Chromium Single Cell 30 Reagent
Kits v2 (10x Genomics; Cat. #120237) were sequenced on
an Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Cell

Figure 14. (See previous page). Tbx3 loss reduces NOS1D myenteric neurons. Casz1, Rbfox1, and Tbx2 mutants had
normal abundance of Chat-EGFPD neurons and Casz1 and Rbfox1 had normal colon bead expulsion. (A, B) Confocal
maximum intensity projections of P0 Tbx3 mutant and control small bowel myenteric plexus revealed a (C, D) 30% reduction in
NOS1þ/Total neuron ratio in (C) Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Tbx3ﬂ/ﬂ P0 small bowel (P ¼ .041, n ¼ 3 per group) despite (D) normal total
neuron density (P ¼ .601, n ¼ 3 per group). (E) P0 small bowel myenteric plexus of control and (F) Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Casz1ﬂ/ﬂ mice
also carrying the Chat-EGFP-L10A reporter. (G) Quantiﬁcation shows normal Chat-EGFPþ/Total neuron ratios (P ¼ .424, n ¼ 3
in each group) and normal neuron density (H; P ¼ .700, n ¼ 3 in each group) in Casz1 mutant P0 small bowel. (I) Colonic bead
expulsion latency is normal in Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Casz1ﬂ/ﬂ mice (P ¼ .073, n ¼ 6 [control, male ¼ 2/female ¼ 4, P44–70 at start of
assay], n ¼ 7 [Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Casz1ﬂ/ﬂ, male ¼ 2/female ¼ 5, P42–50 at start of assay]). (J) RT-PCR of TDTOMATOþ cells from
Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Casz1ﬂ/ﬂ ;TdTomatoþ mice lacks the Casz1 band, consistent with loss of Casz1 expression. Single confocal
planes from P0 small bowel of (K) control and (L) Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Rbfox1ﬂ/ﬂ bred to Chat-EGFP-L10A. (M, N) Quantiﬁcation
shows that proportion of EGFPþ neurons (P ¼ .162, n ¼ 4 per group) and total neuron density (P ¼ .470, n ¼ 4 per group) are
normal in Rbfox1 mutants. (O) Colon bead expulsion latency is normal in Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Rbfox1ﬂ/ﬂ mice (P ¼ .2677, n ¼ 5
[control, male ¼ 2/female ¼ 3, P44–46 at start of assay], n ¼ 6 [Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Rbfox1ﬂ/ﬂ, male ¼ 2/female ¼ 4, P46–58 at start
of assay]). (P, Q) Control mice at P0 showed robust RBFOX1 immunoﬂuorescence in neuronal nuclei (white/green, examples
shown with white arrowheads), whereas Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Rbfox1ﬂ/ﬂ had no neuronal nuclear RBFOX1 immunoﬂuorescence. (R,
S) Single confocal planes from P0 small bowel myenteric plexus from control and Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Tbx2ﬂ/ﬂ bred to Chat-EGFP-
L10A. (T, U) Quantiﬁcation shows that proportion of EGFPþ neurons (P ¼ .926, n ¼ 4 [control] and n ¼ 3 [Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Tbx2ﬂ/ﬂ])
and total neuron density (P ¼ .857, n ¼ 4 [control] and n ¼ 3 [Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Tbx2ﬂ/ﬂ]) are normal in Tbx2 mutants. (V, W) Control
mice at P0 showed robust TBX2 immunoﬂuorescence in neuronal nuclei (white/green), whereas Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Tbx2ﬂ/ﬂ had no
neuronal nuclear TBX2 immunoﬂuorescence. (C, D, G–I, M, O, T, U) Mean ± SD. (C, D, G, H, M, N, T) Student’s t test. (I, O, U)
Mann-Whitney. (A, B, E, F, K, L, P–S, V, W) Scale bar ¼ 100 mm. ChAT-EGFP-L10A¼Chat-EGFP. *P < .05. Ctrl, control; Mt,
Wnt1-CreCre/wt;Casz1ﬂ/ﬂ ;TdTomatoþ.

1572

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

Ranger pipeline (10x Genomics) was used to convert BCL
ﬁles into FASTQ ﬁles, perform STAR alignment,58 ﬁlter,
count UMIs, and generate gene-barcode matrices. Cell

Ranger Aggr pipeline (10x Genomics; v. 3.0.0) was used to
aggregate multiple
and
samples, normalize outputs,
recompute gene-barcode matrices on combined data.

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

2021

Data Availability

Raw and processed single cell and single nucleus RNA
at GEO Accession:
available

data

are

sequencing
GSE156905.

Analysis of Murine Single-Nucleus and Single-
Cell Sequencing Data

Using Seurat,17,59 gene-barcode matrices were imported
into R, version 3.5.1 (R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria), ﬁltered to remove low
expressors or doublets (nGenes ¼ 200–5000 for adult
distal colon; nGenes ¼ 1000–9000 for E17.5 whole bowel)
and mitochondrial contaminants (percent mitochondria
<10% for adult distal colon, percent mitochondria <5%
for E17.5 whole bowel), normalized, and scaled to regress
out UMIs and percent mitochondria. Cells were clustered
using the most statistically signiﬁcant principal compo-
nents. To cluster the E17.5 mouse data, we excluded genes
located on the X and Y chromosomes from the principal
components and included principal components up to the
point where either any additional principal component
contributed <5% of SD and the principal components
cumulatively contributed to 90% of the SD or when the
variation changes by <0.1% between consecutive principal
components.60 This turned out to be 15 principal compo-
nents. For adult mouse distal colon data, we found that
the recommended statistically signiﬁcant
taking all of
resulted in difﬁcult-to-interpret
principal
clustering, possibly owing to batch effects in our dataset,

components

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1573

and that the ﬁrst w11 components were sufﬁcient to
cluster our data in a biologically meaningful way. When
reclustering was performed on subsets of data (ie, to ﬁlter
out contaminants), subsetted data were rescaled and
reclustered using the same method described previously,
minus the normalization step. To identify genes that were
differentially expressed between clusters, clusters were
compared 1 at a time to all other cells in the dataset using
a Wilcoxon rank sum test with Bonferroni multiple testing
correction (Seurat’s FindAllMarkers command). A cutoff of
at least 10% of cells in a group expressing a gene of in-
terest was required for genes to be tested, and only genes
with loge(fold change) >0.25 were included in the analysis.
Heatmaps (Figure 2–4, 7, 10–12) were generated by taking
the mean of the log-normalized data scaled by Seurat for
cells within each cluster. Except where indicated, only
genes that were differentially expressed between neuronal
clusters are shown. Hierarchical clustering (Figure 18C)
was performed using the complete linkage method. For the
GO term analysis, we combined the 3 putative immature
clusters into 1 and compared gene expression for these 3
clusters with the gene expression of all other clusters using
a Wilcoxon rank sum test with Bonferroni multiple testing
correction (Seurat’s FindMarkers command). We per-
formed GO enrichment analysis for GO biological processes
(PANTHER Overrepresentation Test, GO database released
2020-02-21) using Fisher’s exact test with false discovery
rate correction. We submitted differentially expressed
genes for the immature clusters (immature Chat cluster1,
immature Nos1 cluster) and
immature Chat cluster 2,

Figure 15. (See previous page). Pou3f3 is expressed in mouse colon ENS but not small intestine ENS. In adult humans,
nuclear POU3F3 immunoreactivity was also restricted to colon enteric neurons. (A) Feature plot shows scattered E17.5
enteric neurons expressing Pou3f3 throughout the neuron clusters. Color key represents loge(normalized gene expression). (B)
Violin plot of Pou3f3 expression in E17.5 enteric neurons indicates that Pou3f3 is predominantly expressed in Immature Chat
cluster 2 and Immature Nos1 cluster. (C–Z) Whole mount immunohistochemistry conﬁrms that POU3F3 immunoreactivity
(green) is not detected in small bowel enteric neurons at (C) E12.5, (E) at E14.5, (H–N) at E17.5, or (O–Z) in adulthood. POU3F3
immunoreactivity is easily detected in (D) proximal colon at E12.5 (arrows) and throughout the colon (F) at E14.5, (H, M) at
E17.5, and (S, Y) in adulthood. (N, T, Z) At E17.5 and in adulthood, colonic POU3F3 co-localizes with the enteric neuron marker
HuC/D. Confocal z-stack maximum intensity projections at (AA–AL) lower magniﬁcation and (AM–AX) high magniﬁcation of
whole mount immunohistochemistry for POU3F3 in (AA–AC, AG–AI, AM–AO, AS–AU) adult human small intestine and (AD–AF,
AJ–AL, AP–AR, AV–AX) adult human colon shows nuclear POU3F3 localization only in colonic neurons. (AA–AC, AM–AO) No
intestine submucosal plexus, whereas (AD–AF, AP–AR) clear nuclear
POU3F3 staining was detectable in human small
POU3F3 staining could be seen in human colon submucosal neurons. (AG–AI, AS–AU) Cytoplasmic POU3F3 antibody staining
was present in a subpopulation of human small intestine myenteric neurons. (AJ–AL, AV–AX) In the human colon myenteric
plexus, all neurons showed clear nuclear POU3F3 localization. (AY) Representative RT-PCR for ﬂow sorted TDTOMATOþ ENS
cells from Wnt1-Cre;R26R-TdTomato mice conﬁrms Pou3f3 in fetal colon but not small intestine (SI). (AZ) Feature plot showing
scattered E17.5 enteric colonic neurons. Cells expressing Pou3f3 were assigned colonic identity. Red circle marks immature
clusters: immature Chat cluster 1, immature Chat cluster 2, and immature Nos1 cluster. (BA) Genes differentially expressed by
cells assigned colon identity compared with cells assigned small intestine identity within the 3 immature clusters (immature
Chat cluster 1, immature Chat cluster 2, immature Nos1 cluster). (BB) Genes differentially expressed by cells assigned colon
identity compared with cells assigned small intestine identity within the 3 mature clusters (Chat cluster 1 and 2 and Nos1
cluster 1, 2, and 3). (BC) Violin plots showing expression of the differentially expressed genes across all E17.5 neuron clusters
indicate that the genes identiﬁed in BA are speciﬁc to immature Chat cluster 1 and not colon or small intestine (Pearson
correlation between the expression of the identiﬁed gene and Pou3f3 supports this conclusion: P > .1 for all, except Dpysl3;
correlation coefﬁcient ¼ 0.0819, P ¼ .0294). (BD) Violin plots showing expression of the differentially expressed genes across
all E17.5 neuron clusters suggest that the expression of genes Ahr and Pantr1 and possibly Zfhx3 are speciﬁc to colon
myenteric neurons (Pearson correlation between the expression of the identiﬁed gene and Pou3f3 supports this conclusion:
Ahr, correlation coefﬁcient ¼ 0.3581, P < 2.2 (cid:2) 10-6; Pantr1, correlation coefﬁcient ¼ 0.5640, P < 2.2 (cid:2) 10-6; Zfhx3, correlation
coefﬁcient ¼ 0.4034, P < 2.2 (cid:2) 10-6). Images are representative of 3 independent biological replicates. Scale bar ¼ 100 mm (C,
E–AL), 200 mm (D), 20 mm (AM–AX) 500 mm (G), 1 mm (H). ChAT-EGFP-L10A¼Chat-EGFP. MP, myenteric plexus; SP, sub-
mucosal plexus,

1574

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

Figure 16. Human single-nucleus RNA-seq analysis from 20,167 cells yielded data from many cells that impact bowel
motility including SMC, ICC, PDGFRAD cells, muscularis macrophage, and glia. (A) Human myenteric plexus after in-
cubation with 4-Di-2-Asp (4-(4-(dimethylamino)styryl)-N-methylpyridinium iodide), with muscle layers partially peeled away.
Scale bar ¼ 50 mm. (B) RNA-seq workﬂow for adult human colon myenteric plexus. (C) t-SNE plot of 20,167 nuclei shows glia,
ICC, muscularis macrophages, PDGFRAþ cells, smooth muscle, T cells, endothelium, and unknown groups. Neurons
comprise 1 small cluster (w48 cells). (D–L) Feature plots showing genes expressed highly in (D, E) adult human smooth muscle
(ACTG2, MYH11), (F) vessel endothelial cells (VWF), (G, H) glial cells (PLP1, SOX10), (I) ICC (ANO1), (J) PDGFRAþ cells
(PDGFRA), (K) muscularis macrophages (CD14), and (L) T cells (CD2). Color key represents loge(normalized gene expression).

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1575

Table 2.Characteristics of Colon Resection Samples

Sample ID

Age (y)

Sex

History

Colon region

RNA Integrity number:
plexus

RNA Integrity number:
surrounding muscle

4579

4602

4683

4695

4701

4950

4969

4966

4988

4992

5031

5035

5040

5047

5054

5059

54

75

38

77

78

78

83

71

65

47

70

24

44

65

36

59

M

M

M

F

M

M

M

F

F

M

M

M

M

M

F

F

Cecal polyp

Cecal lesion

Goblet cell carcinoma

Colonic mass

Rectal cancer

Right

Right

Right

Right

Sigmoid

Bowel obstruction

Sigmoid colon

Adenocarcinoma

Bowel obstruction

Colon polyp

Right colon

Right colon

Right colon

Rectal carcinoma

Sigmoid colon

Colon polyp

Volvulus

Colonic mass

Right colon

Sigmoid colon

Right colon

Rectal adenocarcinoma

Sigmoid colon

Bowel adhesions

Right colon

Adenocarcinoma

Right

7.6

7.5

7.9

7.4

8.2

6.50, 6.90, and 7.10
(3 pieces)

6.5

7.2

5.20 and 2.90 (RNA
concentration very low)

4.4 (RNA concentration
very low)a
7.8

8

7.7

6.6

7.6

7.2

7.9

6.9

8

7.4

6.3

7.6

7.90, 5.80 (2 pieces)

8.1, 7.9 (2 pieces)

7.5 and 7.4 (2 pieces)

7.1

7.4 and 7.2

6.6 and 7.2

7.5 and 7.8

7.4

7.20 and 7.70

7.50 and 6.40

F, female; M, male.
aRNA concentrations which are too low can yield sub-par RIN.

compared these to the reference gene list for mus musculus
(22265 genes). We also submitted differentially expressed
genes for the more mature cluster (Chat cluster 1, Chat
cluster 2, Nos1 cluster 1, Nos1 cluster 2, Nos1 cluster 3)

and compared these with the reference gene list for Mus
musculus
(22265 genes). We reported the 20 most
enriched GO terms. To identify genes differentially
expressed between colon and small intestine, we deﬁned

Table 3.UMI and Gene Counts From Colon Resection Samples

Cells or nuclei
loaded (predicted
from FACS)

Cells with
RNA-Seq data

Ratio of sequenced
cells to loaded
cells

Average UMI count
with intronic reads
mapped

Average gene count
with intronic reads
mapped

Sample ID

4579

4602

4683

4695

4701

4950

4969

4966

4988

4992

5031

5035

5040

5047

5054

5059

4000

6900

6300

4000

12300

5200

5300

2100

1200

673

5200

7100

2300

5000

3100

1200

680

2316

2081

833

4414

1237

653

432

237

60

1728

2524

755

957

1219

338

0.17

0.3356522

0.3303175

0.20825

0.3588618

0.2378846

0.1232075

0.2057143

0.1975

0.089153

0.3323077

0.355493

0.3282609

0.1914

0.3932258

0.2816667

2474

2004

1397

1487

1296

1415

1262

1856

2354

3939

1538

1886

1941

1701

2071

2470

FACS, ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorter; RNA-seq, RNA sequencing; UMI, unique molecular identiﬁer.

1559

1268

876

974

780

910

1262

1193

1554

2336

967

1119

1212

1013

1216

1474

1576

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

Figure 17. Human single-nucleus RNA-seq analysis showed minimal batch effects and yielded data from 48 deﬁnitive
neurons. (A–C) t-SNE plots of human nuclei colored by (A) sample number, (B) colon location (right vs sigmoid), and (C) sex.
Cells from different colon regions and different sexes largely form the same t-SNE clusters. (D–F) Feature plots show location
of (D) ELAVL4, (E) UCHL1, and (F) SNAP25 expression suggest that a small population of neurons expressing all 3 is present in
this dataset, but most of the 20,000 nuclei are not ELAVL4, SNAP25, or UCHL1-positive. Color key represents loge(normalized
gene expression).

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1577

colonic neurons as all cells with detectable Pou3f3
expression. We compared gene expression using a Wil-
coxon rank sum test with Bonferroni multiple testing
correction (Seurat’s FindMarkers command) for neurons
within the immature clusters (immature Chat cluster 1,
immature Chat cluster 2, immature Nos1 cluster) or within
the mature clusters (Chat cluster 1, Chat cluster 2, Nos1
cluster 1, Nos1 cluster 2, and Nos1 cluster 3) to normalize
for the relatively more immature state of development of
the majority of Pou3f3-expressing cells (40 mature Pou3f3-
expressing neurons vs 503 other mature neurons and 94
immature Pou3f3-expressing neurons vs 62 other imma-
ture neurons). We followed up the identiﬁcation of
potentially colon-speciﬁc genes by correlating the gene
expression of the gene in question with Pou3f3 expression
in all neurons (pairwise Pearson correlation).

Analysis of Human Single-Nucleus Sequencing
Data

Using Seurat,17,59 gene-barcode matrices were im-
ported into R, ﬁltered to remove low-expressors or
doublets (nGenes ¼ 200–5000) and mitochondrial con-
taminants (percent mitochondria <10%), normalized,
and scaled to regress out UMIs and percent mitochon-
dria. Nuclei were clustered using the most statistically
signiﬁcant principal components identiﬁed by elbow plot
(11 principle components). Because unbiased clustering
initially did not detect the small group of neurons as a
distinct group, we identiﬁed 48 neurons by isolating all
nuclei expressing any copies of ELAVL4, UCHL1, or
SNAP25 (Figure 18A). These nuclei were reclustered. We
saw 7 subgroups that we believe are doublets contain-
ing neuronal and non-neuronal nuclei based on coex-
pression of genes like ACTG2, PLP1, KIT 9 (Figure 18B).
One subgroup appeared to be pure single-neuron data
based on high expression of other neuronal markers like
SYT1 and DSCAM and the absence of markers for other
well-deﬁned cell populations (Figure 18B). The strongly
positive cluster (48 neurons) was mapped back onto the
t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE)
plot. To identify neuron-speciﬁc genes, we compared
this cluster of neurons against all other cell populations
using a Wilcoxon rank sum test with Bonferroni multi-
ple testing correction (Seurat’s FindMarkers command).
A cutoff of at
least 25% of cells in a group with
expression >0 was required for genes to be tested.
Neuron gene expression for the top 50 neuron-speciﬁc
genes was graphed and neurons were clustered using
the Euclidean distance method (Figure 18C). This
revealed 2 groups of neurons, 1 which was NOS1þ and
another that was NOS1–. We imported a list of 36
transcription and splice factors identiﬁed as signiﬁcantly
different in mouse adult colon Nos1 and Chat expressing
neurons. Using this list and Seurat’s FindMarkers com-
mand, we compared expression for these genes between
NOS1þ and NOS1– neurons and found differential
factors
expression
(Figure 18D).

transcription

subset

for

of

a

Preparing Bowel for Whole Mount
Immunochemistry

steel

insect pins

E17.5 bowel was washed in PBS, straightened with
stainless
(Fine Science Tools; Cat.
#26002-20) on Sylgard Elastomer 184 and ﬁxed (4%
paraformaldehyde [PFA], 20 minutes, room temperature
[RT]). P0 small intestine in ice-cold PBS was opened along
mesenteric border, pinned with insect pins serosal side
up without stretching onto Sylgard Elastomer 184, before
ﬁxing (4% PFA, 20–30 minutes, RT) and peeling muscu-
laris from mucosa/submucosa. Adult distal colon ﬂushed
with ice-cold PBS was opened along the mesenteric
border. Muscle layers were peeled from mucosa/submu-
cosa using Dumont #5 forceps (Fine Science Tools; Cat.
#11251-30), maximally stretched, pinned (insect pins) to
Sylgard Elastomer 184, ﬁxed (4% PFA, 20–30 minutes,
RT), brieﬂy washed (1(cid:2) PBS), equilibrated in 50% glyc-
erol/50% PBS (30 minutes, RT; or overnight, 4(cid:4)C) before
storage (–20(cid:4)C). For high magniﬁcation anti-enkephalin
and anti-SP staining, colon opened along mesenteric
border was stretched, pinned, and ﬁxed (4% PFA, over-
night, 4(cid:4)C), rinsed in 1(cid:2) PBS (3 (cid:2) 10 minutes), and then
dissected with ﬁne forceps to remove mucosa, submucosa,
and circular muscle from myenteric plexus attached to
longitudinal muscle.

Anti-enkephalin and anti-SP antibody studies used
C57BL6 wild-type mice. Proximal, mid, and distal colon
tissue was removed, opened along the mesenteric border,
cleaned of fecal matter, stretched and pinned to Sylgard
Elastomer 184, and postﬁxed (4% PFA, overnight, 4(cid:4)C).
After rinsing 3 times (10 min/rinse) in 1(cid:2) PBS, mucosa,
submucous plexus and circular muscle were removed with
ﬁne forceps,
leaving preparations of myenteric plexus
attached to longitudinal muscle.

Whole Mount Immunohistochemistry

Bowel stored at –20(cid:4)C in 50% glycerol/50% PBS was
rinsed in PBS, blocked (2 hours, PBS þ 0.5% Triton X-100
(Sigma-Aldrich; Cat. #T8787) with 5% normal donkey
serum (NDS) (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratory, West
Grove, PA; RRID: AB_2337258), incubated in primary anti-
body (Table 9) with gentle rocking (4(cid:4)C, 2 days), except for
(4(cid:4)C). After
ANNA-1, which was incubated overnight
washing (3 (cid:2) 5 minutes, 0.5% PBS þ 0.5% Triton X-100)
and secondary antibody (Table 9) incubation in blocking
solution with gentle rocking (1 hour, RT), tissue was washed
(3 (cid:2) 5 minutes, PBS) and mounted in 50% glycerol/50%
PBS.

For high-magniﬁcation imaging, longitudinal muscle with
exposed myenteric plexus was placed in 10% Casblock
(Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; Cat. #008120) with 0.1% Triton
X-100 (ProSciTech, Thuringowa, Queensland, Australia) in
PBS (30 minutes, RT), then in primary antisera (24–48
hours, 4(cid:4)C) (Table 9) before rinsing (PBS, 3 (cid:2) 10 minutes),
and secondary antisera staining (Table 9) (2 hours, RT).
After rinsing (PBS, 3 (cid:2) 10 minutes), preparations were
mounted using ﬂuorescence mounting medium (DAKO,
Carpenteria, CA).

1578

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Phosphate
Diaphorase Staining

Bowel was pinned ﬂat and ﬁxed (4% PFA, 20 minutes,
RT), brieﬂy washed (1(cid:2) PBS), incubated in 0.1-M phosphate

buffer, pH 7.4 with 1-mg/mL beta-nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (beta-NADPH; Sigma-Aldrich; Cat.
#N750), 0.1-mg/mL nitroblue tetrazolium (Sigma-Aldrich;
Cat. #11383213001), 0.3% Triton-X 100 (1 hour, 37(cid:4)C),

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1579

washed in PBS, and imaged immediately in a custom-made
holding chamber.

Preparing Human Colon for Whole Mount
Immunochemistry

Human colon with fat trimmed was pinned serosa side
up on Sylgard Elastomer 184 plates in ice-cold PBS using
stainless steel insect pins. Tissue was maximally stretched
during pinning to make the colon as thin as possible. Pinned
tissue was ﬁxed overnight (4(cid:4)C, 4% PFA), washed in DPBS,
and stored at 4(cid:4)C in 50% PBS/50% glycerol/0.05% sodium
azide until staining.

Immunoﬂuorescence Staining of Human Colon
Whole Mount

Following our new protocol,13 0.7–1 cm (cid:2) 0.7–1 cm
colon pieces were washed (1(cid:2) PBS, RT), incubated in 100%
methanol on ice (1 hour), treated with Dent’s bleach (1 mL
30% hydrogen peroxide (Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; Cat.
#H1009), 1-mL dimethyl sulfoxide (Sigma-Aldrich; Cat.
#D2650), 4 mL 100% methanol61 at room temperature (2
hours), washed again (1(cid:2) PBS, 3 (cid:2) 5 minutes, room tem-
perature), blocked (0.5% Triton X-100, 5% NDS in PBS, 3
days), and then incubated 14 days in blocking solution with
primary antibodies (37(cid:4)C, 40–100 rpm) (Table 9). Following
PBS washing (1 day, 3 washes, gentle rocker, RT), colon was
incubated in secondary antibodies (3 days, 37(cid:4)C, 40–100
rpm), washed in PBS over 1 day, dehydrated in a methanol
series, and placed in Murray’s clear (2:1 benzyl benzoate:-
benzyl alcohol, gentle rocking, RT) until translucent (30–60
minutes). Transparent colon mounted on glass slides in
Murray’s clear was imaged within 1 day (for details, see dx.
doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.wyeffte).

Microscopy

Images were acquired with a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal
microscope with 20(cid:2)/0.8 air or 63(cid:2)/1.4 oil DIC M27 Plan-
Apochromat objectives and Zeiss Zen software version 2.3
14.0.14.201 or upright ﬂuorescent Olympus BX60 micro-
scope (Shinjuku City, Tokyo,
Japan) with Axiocam CCD
camera and Axiovision software (Carl Zeiss Microscopy,
North Ryde, New South Wales, Australia). ImageJ, version
2.35 (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) and
Photoshop CS6 (Adobe, San Jose, CA) were used to crop and

uniformly adjust color. High-magniﬁcation myenteric plexus
images were acquired with a Zeiss LSM 880 Airyscan mi-
croscope with a Plan-Apochromat 63 (cid:2) 1.40 Oil DIC M27
objective (Carl Zeiss Microscopy; Cat. #420782-990-799) at
the Biological Optical Microscopy Platform, University of
Melbourne.

Image Analysis

Counting for adult mouse distal colon and human colon
was performed on >5 randomly selected 320 ﬁelds per
animal in each region using ImageJ’s CellCounter module
(Table 10). Because of high cell density at E17.5, only half of
each 320 ﬁeld was counted. Investigators were blinded to
genotype when comparing knockout to control mice. High-
magniﬁcation myenteric plexus images were processed to
quantify SP and enkephalin colocalization using Imaris 9.0.0
(Bitplane, Zürich, Switzerland).21

RNA Extraction and RT-PCR for Pou3f3
Expression Analysis

Wnt1-Cre;R26-TdTomato E14.5 and E17.5 dams were
euthanized with 5% CO2, and pups were removed from the
mother. For each litter, all TdTomatoþ small intestines and
colons were combined to increase cell count. Small
intestines and colons were dissected in ice-cold Dulbecco-
modiﬁed PBS, transferred to HBSS (Thermo-Fisher Scienti-
ﬁc; Cat No: 14025092), separated, divided into small pieces
using insulin needles (Beckton Dickerson; Cat. #08290-
3284-18), and dissociated for 30 minutes at 37(cid:4)C in Lib-
erase (Sigma-Aldrich; Cat. #5401135001) supplemented
with DNase I (Roche; Cat. #04716728001), MgCl2 (6 mM)
and CaCl2 (1 mM) in HBSS with P1000 trituration. Cells
were ﬁltered, washed with Iscove’s DMEM (Cat. #10-016-
CM), and resuspended in FACS buffer (10mM HEPES,
1mg/mL BSA, 1% penicillin and streptomycin (Thermo-
Fisher Scientiﬁc; Cat. #15140122) in HBSS). Fluorescent
TdTomatoþ cells were sorted on a BD FACSJazz (BD Bio-
sciences, San Jose, CA) and collected in Iscove’s DMEM with
10% FBS. Cells were spun down at 600 g, resuspended in
Buffer RLT plus and RNA was isolated using the Qiagen
RNeasy Plus Micro Kit (Cat. #74034) with DNase treatment
(Qiagen; Cat. #79254).

RNA integrity and concentrations were measured on a
2100 Agilent Bioanalyzer using an RNA 6000 Pico Kit
(Agilent, Santa Clara, CA; Cat. #5067-1513). All samples

Figure 18. (See previous page). Human myenteric plexus NOS1/VIP/GALD and NOS1/VIP/GAL– neurons differentially
express many regulatory genes also differentially expressed in mouse ENS. (A) t-SNE plot of all human nuclei expressing
ELAVL4, UCHL1, or SNAP25 reveals many populations that may be doublets because they cluster with nuclei expressing non-
neuronal cell markers. For this paper, we only describe in detail expression data for the tight cluster of cells we believe are
single neurons based on high expression of ELAVL4, SNAP25, UCHL1, SYT1, and DSCAM (highlighted with red circle). (B)
Feature plots of neuronal markers (ELAVL4, SNAP25, UCHL1, SYT1, and DSCAM), SMC markers (ACTG2), glial cell markers
(PLP1), ICC markers (KIT), and PDGFRAþ cell markers (PDGFRA) suggest that other populations are not neurons. Color key
represents loge(normalized gene expression). (C) Heatmap shows 50 genes with the highest fold difference between neurons
and other cells. Hierarchical clustering suggests 2 subgroups: NOS1þ/VIPþ/GALþ (17 neurons) and NOS1–/VIP-/GAL– (31
neurons). (D) Heatmap shows transcription and splicing factors differentially expressed in mouse colon that were in >10% of
human myenteric neurons. RBFOX1, ETV1, and BNC2 were differentially expressed between NOS1/VIP/GALþ and NOS1/VIP/
GAL– human neurons (Wilcoxon rank sum test, Bonferroni correction).

1580

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

Figure 19. Immunohisto-
chemistry of human co-
lon myenteric
plexus
preferential
shows
expression
select
of
transcription factors in
NOSD
CHATD and
(A–T)
neuron subtypes.
Maximum intensity pro-
jections of adult human
colonic ENS confocal Z-
stacks: (A–D) BNC2, (E–H)
PBX3 (white arrowheads
indicate nuclear PBX3 in
(I–L) RBFOX1,
neurons),
(M–P) TBX2, and (Q–T)
TBX3 are present in sub-
sets of human myenteric
(U–Y)
neurons.
Immuno-
histochemistry quantiﬁca-
tion: (U) BNC2 (P ¼ .0001,
(V) PBX3 (P ¼
n ¼ 3),
.0021, n ¼ 3), (W) RBFOX1
(P ¼ .0007, n ¼ 3), and (X)
TBX2 (P ¼ .0089, n ¼ 3) are
primarily in CHATþ neu-
rons. (Y) TBX3 (P ¼ .0004,
n ¼ 3)
is primarily in
NOS1þ neurons. Quantiﬁ-
cation of (Z) CHATþ and
(AA) NOS1þ reveals that
BNC2 (P ¼ .0102), PBX3 (P
¼ .0021), RBFOX1 (P ¼
.0016), and TBX2 (P ¼
.0162) are largely restricted
to CHATþ neurons in adult
human ENS (P values
compare
Transcription
factorþEGFPþ/Transcrip-
tion factorþ vs EGFPþ/
Total neuron ratios). TBX3
(P ¼ .0073) is primarily in
NOS1þ neurons (P values
compare
Transcription
factorþNOS1þ/Transcrip-
tion factorþ vs NOS1þ/
(U–
Total neuron ratios).
AA) Mean ± SD and Stu-
dent’s t
*P < .05,
test.
**P < .01,
***P < .001.
Scale bar ¼ 100 mm.

O
P
F
=
C
4

b
e
w

used had RIN (cid:5)7. Complementary DNA was generated
using Superscript II RNase H (Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc;
Cat. #18064022). RT-PCR was performed using KAPA
mixture
and previously described
primers (Table 8). Three replicates were run for all
experiments.

(Cat. #KK7352)

Colon Bead Expulsion Studies

Young adult mice (P44–58 at begin of assay, P49–64 at
end of assay) were anesthetized with 2 L/min carbogen with
2.5% (v/v) isoﬂurane (Piramal, Mumbai, India; Cat. #NDC
66794-017-10) for 1.5 minutes before the start of the
experiment, anesthesia was continued until completed bead

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1581

?
s
n
o
r
u
e
n
r
e
t
n

i

±
s
n
o
r
u
e
n

?
s
n
o
r
u
e
n
r
e
t
n

i

±
s
n
o
r
u
e
n

n
o
r
u
e
N

s
n
o
r
u
e
n

r
o
t
o
m

y
r
o
t
a
t
i
c
x
e

r
o
t
o
m
y
r
o
t
a
t
i
c
x
e

s
n
o
r
u
e
n

h
t
i

w

(

s
n
o
r
u
e
n
r
e
t
n

i

e
v
i
t
i
s
n
e
s
o
n
a
h
c
e
m

)
s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
p

,
s
n
o
r
u
e
n

2

s
o
N

1

s
o
N

l

b
c
a
C

)

2
t
u
g
V

l

(

4

t
a
h
C

)
t
e
M

(

3

t
a
h
C

2

t
a
h
C

1

t
a
h
C

t
l
u
d
a

(

e
m
a
n

r
e
t
s
u
C

l

)

n
o
o
c

l

r
o
t
o
m
y
r
o
t
i
b
h
n

i

I

r
o
t
o
m
y
r
o
t
i
b
h
n

i

I

y
r
o
s
n
e
S

i

c
s
n
i
r
t
n

I

n
o
r
u
e
n
r
e
t
n

I

r
o

s
n
o
r
u
e
n
r
e
t
n

I

r
o

s
n
o
r
u
e
n
r
e
t
n

I

y
r
o
s
n
e
s

i

c
s
n
i
r
t
n

I

e
p
y
t

n
o
r
u
e
n

d
e
t
s
e
g
g
u
S

q
e
S
-
A
N
R
n
o

i

d
e
s
a
B
n
o
i
t
a
c
ﬁ
s
s
a
C
e
p
y
t
b
u
S

l

n
o
r
u
e
N
c
i
r
e
t
n
E

t
l
u
d
A

i

d
e
t
c
d
e
r
P

.

4

l

e
b
a
T

,
l
a
G

,

i

p
V

a
,
1
s
o
N

a
,
l
a
G
a
,
p
V

i

a
,
1
s
o
N

y
p
N

a
y
p
N

a
,
a
1
1
n
c
S

,

m
f
e
N
a
,
b
c
a
C

l

,

i

p
V

,

1
s
o
N

a
1
c
a
T

a
)
1
o
z
e
P

i

(

g
n
i
t
r
o
p
p
u
s

,
t
a
h
C
a
,
3
a
8
1
c
S

l

a
,
k
n
e
P

a
,
t
e
M

,
t
a
h
C

a
k
n
e
P

a
,
1
c
a
T

,
t
a
h
C

,

1
c
a
T

,

3
a
8
1
c
S

l

a
,
t
a
h
C

s
r
e
k
r
a
m
d
e
s
s
e
r
p
x
E

a
2
x
r
2
P

a
,
a
3
r
t

H

a
l
i

v
A
a
,
p
r
G
a
,
u
m
N

a
6
a
7
1
c
S

l

a
2
b
a
C

l

e
t
o
n

f
o

s
e
n
e
g

r
e
h
t
O

a
,
1
r
c
a
T

a
,
2
b
a
C

l

a
,
b
3
r
t

H
a
,
a
3
r
t

H

a
2
x
r
2
P

a
,
k
n
e
P

a
,
1
b
a
C

l

a

m
f
e
N

i

n
o
s
u
c
n
o
c

l

y

l
l

a
i
t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d

,

i

p
V

,

1
s
o
N
n
o

)
l

a
G

,

i

p
V

,

1
s
o
N
n
o

)
l

a
G

,

p
r
G

,

u
m
N

)

l

b
c
a
C

d
e
s
a
b

(

7
-
1
_
N
M
P

I

d
e
s
a
b

(

7
-
1
_
N
M
P

I

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

1
_
N
S
P

,

6
a
7
1
c
S

l

,
t
a
h
C

)

2
h
p
x
N

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

3
N
S
P

r
o

3
N
P

I

,
k
n
e
P

,
t
a
h
C

,
l
r
c
a
C

l

,

1
c
a
T

)

1
p
m
a
R

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

2
N
M
E
P

,
t
a
h
C
n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

d
n
a

,

1
c
a
T

,
k
n
e
P

)

1
o
z
e
P

i

t
n
e
s
b
a

,

1
c
a
T

,
t
a
h
C
n
o

s
n
o
i
t
a
n
g
s
e
d

i

e
p
y
t
b
u
s

)

1
o
z
e
P

i

l

y
k
s
n
a
y
h
k
o
r
D
m
o
r
f

e
s
u
o
M

t
l
u
d
A

(

8
l
a

t
e

)

l

n
o
o
C

r
o

2
N
P

I

,

1
N
P

I

2
N
P

I

,

1
N
P

I

r
o

,

2
N
M
E
P

d
e
s
a
b

(

6

,

4

,

3

,

1
N
M
E
P

n
o
r
u
e
n

i

g
n
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
C

d
e
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

,
s
o
N

(

0
1
-
8
C
N
E

,
s
o
N

(

0
1
-
8
C
N
E

5
C
N
E
>
6
C
N
E

7
C
N
E
>
2
1
C
N
E

,

1
c
a
T

,
t
a
h
C

(

4
C
N
E

,

1
c
a
T

,
t
a
h
C

(

4
-
2
C
N
E

,

1
c
a
T

,
t
a
h
C

(

,

7
1
C
N
E

n
o
r
u
e
n

i

g
n
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
C

)
l

a
G

,

i

p
V

)
l

a
G

,

i

p
V

,

u
m
N

,

l

b
c
a
C

(

,
k
n
e
P

,

6
a
7
1
c
S

l

(

)
t
s
S

,

g
o
N

)

m
f
e
N

,

2
h
p
x
N

,

9
t
u
F

,
k
n
e
P

,
)

1
c
t
a
f
N

)
k
n
e
P

)
k
n
e
P

t
n
e
s
b
a

s
n
o
i
t
a
n
g
s
e
d

i

e
p
y
t
b
u
s

5
l
a

t
e

h
c
a
r
a
r
o
M
n

i

l
l

a
m
s

e
s
u
o
m
1
2
P

(

y
r
e
v
—
)
e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

l

e
b
a

l
i

a
v
a

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
i

m

i
l

2
T
N
E
>
3
1
T
N
E

,

,

1
T
N
E
>
2
T
N
E

,

l

1
y
M

,

u
m
N

(

9
T
N
E

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

7
T
N
E

l

t
n
e
a
v
u
q
e

i

o
N

n

i

r
e
t
s
u
c

l

l

t
n
e
a
v
u
q
e

i

o
N

,

1
c
a
T

,
t
a
h
C

(

5
T
N
E

n
o
r
u
e
n

i

g
n
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
C

,

1
s
s
A

,

1
s
o
N

(

,
l
a
G

,

b
8
x
o
C

)

1
d
x
o
M

,
t
p
t
r
a
C

(

3
N
E

,

1
s
s
A

,

1
s
o
N

)

l

p
a
g
B

)

2
x
r
2
P

,
k
n
e
P

,
t
a
h
C

,

2
h
p
x
N

,

l

1
b
a
C

,

6
a
7
1
c
S

l

i

s
h
t

n

i

r
e
t
s
u
c

l

e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

l
l

a
m
s

e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

l
l

a
m
s

i

s
h
t

.
t
e
s
a
t
a
d

.
t
e
s
a
t
a
d

d
e
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

l

y
n
o

s

i

k
n
e
P

)

a
2
x
o
h
P

t
s
e
s
o
c

l

s

i

6
T
N
E

,

7
T
N
E

d
n
a

6
T
N
E

n

i

8
1
0
1

,

8
1
0
1

,

7
4

1
o
z
e
P

i

,

4
n
n
c
K

,

4
6
7
4
5

,

,

1
c
a
T

,
t
a
h
C

(

,

9
t
u
F

,
k
n
e
P

t
u
b

,

1
c
t
a
f
N

s

i

6
T
N
E

t
e
M
g
n
s
s
m

i

i

)

i

n
o
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

e
s
e
h
t

f
o

r
e
h
t
i
e
n

t
u
b

d
o
o
g

a

e
r
a

s
r
e
t
s
u
c

l

o
t

e
u
d

h
c
t
a
m

i

n
o
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

6
a
7
1
c
S

l

d
n
a
9
t
u
F
f
o
k
c
a

l

d
n
a

n

i

i

n
o
s
s
e
r
p
x
e
1
c
t
a
f
N

.
r
e
t
s
u
c

l

i

s
h
t

9
4

0
2
9
1

,

,

5
b
x
o
H

,

n
k
m
D

)
k
n
e
P

t
n
e
s
b
a

s
n
o
i
t
a
n
g
s
e
d

i

e
p
y
t
b
u
s

1
2
P

(

6
l
a
t
e

l

i

e
s
e
Z
m
o
r
f

/
/
:
p
t
t
h

:
)
e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

l
l

a
m
s

e
s
u
o
m

i

.

/
g
r
o
n
a
r
b
e
s
u
o
m

l

.

?
m
t
h
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
n
e
g

,

,

3
6
8
4
0
2
9
1

,

i

i

g
n
s
s
m
s
r
e
k
r
a
M

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

C

.

i

g
n
c
n
e
u
q
e
s

A
N
R

,

q
e
s
-
A
N
R

.

i

n
o
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

l

a
i
t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

D
a

1582

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

1
s
o
n

e
r
u
t
a
m
m

I

t
a
h
c

e
r
u
t
a
m
m

I

t
a
h
c

e
r
u
t
a
m
m

I

l

e
o
h
W
5
7
1
E

.

(

r
e
t
s
u
c

l

2

r
e
t
s
u
c

l

3

r
e
t
s
u
c

l

1
s
o
N

2

r
e
t
s
u
c

l

1
s
o
N

1

r
e
t
s
u
c

l

1
s
o
N

2

r
e
t
s
u
c

l

t
a
h
C

1

r
e
t
s
u
c

l

t
a
h
C

1

r
e
t
s
u
c

l

)
l

e
w
o
B

e
m
o
s
±

(

l

n
o
o
C

e
m
o
s
±

(

l

n
o
o
C

e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

l
l

a
m
S

e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

l
l

a
m
S

e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

l
l

a
m
S

e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

l
l

a
m
S

e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

l
l

a
m
S

e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

l
l

a
m
S

n
o
r
u
e
n

d
e
t
s
e
g
g
u
S

q
e
S
-
A
N
R
n
o

i

d
e
s
a
B
n
o
i
t
a
c
ﬁ
s
s
a
C
e
p
y
t
b
u
S

l

n
o
r
u
e
N
c
i
r
e
t
n
E

.

5
7
1
E

i

d
e
t
c
d
e
r
P

.

5

l

e
b
a
T

e
m
a
n

r
e
t
s
u
C

l

i

c
g
r
e
r
t
i
n

s
n
o
r
u
e
n

i

c
g
r
e
n

i
l

o
h
c

s
n
o
r
u
e
n

s
n
o
r
u
e
n

r
o
t
o
m

s
n
o
r
u
e
n
r
e
t
n

i

r
o

)

e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

l
l

a
m
s

)

e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

l
l

a
m
s

y
r
o
t
i
b
h
n

i

i

s
n
o
r
u
e
n
r
e
t
n

i

s
n
o
r
u
e
n

r
o
t
o
m

s
n
o
r
u
e
n
r
e
t
n

i

r
o

y
r
o
t
i
b
h
n

i

i

i

c
s
n
i
r
t
n

i

y
r
o
s
n
e
s

s
n
o
r
u
e
n

s
n
o
r
u
e
n

r
o
t
o
m

y
r
o
t
a
t
i
c
x
e

s
n
o
r
u
e
n
r
e
t
n

i

e
p
y
t

3
f
3
u
o
P

,

1
s
o
N

3
a
8
1
c
S

l

l

a
G

,

i

p
V

,

1
s
o
N

,
l
a
G

,

i

p
V

,

1
s
o
N

l

a
G

,

i

p
V

,

1
s
o
N

,

l

b
c
a
C

,
a
c
a
C

l

,
t
a
h
C

,

3
a
8
1
c
S

l

,
t
a
h
C

,

3
a
8
1
c
S

l

y

l
l

a
i
t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

D

3
p
m
a
R

,
r
1
y
p
N

,
r
1
y
p
N

,

b
2
r
t

H

,

2
r
t
s
S

,

1
r
t
s
S

,

2
r
t
s
S

,

1
r
t
s
S

,

h
b
D

,

l

1
q
1
C

,

b
r
n
d
E

,
i

b
m
a
B

,

g
o
N

,

u
m
N

b
2
r
t

H

,

2
b
f
g
T

,
r
1
y
p
N

,

6
a
7
1
c
S

l

1
p
m
a
R

,

1
r
k
o
r
P

,
t
p
t
r
a
C

,
a
3
r
t

H

,
t
p
t
r
a
C

r
2
y
p
N

r
2
y
p
N

,
a
3
r
t

H

,

6
y
r
2
P

r
2
y
p
N

,
t
p
t
r
a
C

,

3
k
r
t

N

,
a
2
a
r
d
A

,

7
d
a
m
S

r
2
y
p
N

y
p
N
±

y
p
N
±

y
p
N
±

a
1
r
p
v
A

y

l
l

a
i
t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d

i

n
o
s
u
c
n
o
c

l

f
o

s
e
n
e
g

r
e
h
t
O

e
t
o
n

d
e
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

i

i

g
n
s
s
m
s
r
e
k
r
a
M

/

A
N

/

A
N

9
C
N
E

r
o

8
C
N
E

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

0
1
C
N
E

9
C
N
E

r
o

8
C
N
E

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

6
C
N
E

3
C
N
E
>
2
C
N
E

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

2
1
C
N
E

i

g
n
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
C

6
d
o
r
u
e
N

u
m
N

,

b
3
r
t

H

1
c
a
T

,
k
n
e
P

l

1
b
a
C

,
k
n
e
P

d
e
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

s
r
e
k
r
a
m

g
n
i
t
r
o
p
p
u
s

)
l

a
G

,

i

p
V

,

1
s
o
N

)

6
d
o
r
u
e
N

,
l
a
G

,

i

p
V

,

1
s
o
N

)

l

1
q
1
C

,

3
a
8
1
c
S

l

,
t
a
h
C

,

1
c
a
T

,
k
n
e
P

)

l

2
4
a
f
u
d
N

,
a
d
G

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

,
l
a
G

,

i

p
V

,

1
s
o
N

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

)

u
m
N

,

l

b
c
a
C

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

,

3
a
8
1
c
S

l

,
t
a
h
C

a
t
a
d

n
w
o

r
u
O

a
t
a
d

n
w
o

r
u
O

,

5
6
4
6
2
1

,

,
l
a
G

,

i

p
V

,

1
s
o
N

)
k
t
L

,
t
p
t
r
a
C

5
6
5

,

)

6
d
o
r
u
e
N

,
t
p
t
r
a
C

,
l
a
G

,

i

p
V

,

1
s
o
N

)

g
o
N

,
t
a
h
C
n
o

)
t
p
t
r
a
C

,
k
n
e
P

,

3
a
8
1
c
S

l

,
a
d
G

,

1
c
a
T

)

l

2
4
a
f
u
d
N

,

5
6
3
6
2
1

,

,

7
4
8
1
5

,

,

2
2
8
1
2
1

,

a
t
a
d

n
w
o

r
u
O

/

A
N

/

A
N

3
T
N
E

.

>
2
T
N
E

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

1
T
N
E

2
T
N
E
>
3
T
N
E

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

9
T
N
E

d
n
a

6
T
N
E
>
6
T
N
E

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

7
T
N
E

i

g
n
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
C

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

,
l
a
G

,

i

p
V

,

1
s
o
N

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

(

,

u
m
N

,

l

b
c
a
C

d
e
s
a
b

(

4
T
N
E

,

3
a
8
1
c
S

l

,
t
a
h
C

,

6
a
7
1
c
S

l

)
k
n
e
P

,

l

1
b
a
C

e
p
y
t
b
u
s
n
o
r
u
e
n

h
c
a
r
a
r
o
M
m
o
r
f

s
n
o
i
t
a
n
g
s
e
d

i

5
l
a

t
e

l
l

a
m
s

1
2
P

e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

,

6
a
7
1
c
S

l

l
l

a
m
s

1
2
P

e
n
i
t
s
e
t
n

i

)
k
n
e
P

,

l

1
b
a
C

e
p
y
t
b
u
s
n
o
r
u
e
n

s
n
o
i
t
a
n
g
s
e
d

i

,

,

4
6
7
4
2
2
2
1
5

,

,

l

.
e
b
a

l
i

a
v
a

t
o
n

,

/

A
N

6
l
a

t
e

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

C

l

i

e
s
e
Z
m
o
r
f

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1583

Table 6.List of PCR Primers for Mouse Genotyping

Gene (strain)

Primer sequence

Band size Genotyping solution

Reference

Tbx3

F: 50-GTG TGA GAC AGA GAA ATC AGT GG-30
R: 50-CCA ACT GGT ATC TTG ATA AAC CTC-30

Gfp (ChAT-EGFP-

L10a)

F: 50-TCA TAG AGG CGC AGA GTT CC-30
R: 50-CTG AAC TTG TGG CCG TTT AC-30

Rbfox1

Gfra1-Gfp

Cre (Wnt1-Cre)

R26R-mCherry
(R26R-H2b-
mCherry)

Cre (Vglut2-IRES-

Cre)

Cre (Nos1-

CreERT2)

F: 50-ATGCCCATGCAGTGAAAAAT-30
R: 50-TGCAGCACATTGAAACCTTC-30

Common F: 50-CTTCCAGGTTGGGTCGGAACTGA

Mut R: 50-GCCGTTTACGTCGCCGTCCAGCTC

ACCC-30

GACCAG-30

WT R: 50-AGAGAGCTCAGCGTGCAGAGATC-30
F: 50-GCA TTA CCG GTC GAT GCA ACG AGT GAT

R: 50-GAG TGA ACG AAC CTG GTC GAA ATC AGT

Common F: 50-AAA GTC GCT CTG AGT TGT

Mutant R: 50-TTA TGT AAC GCG GAA CTC CA-30
WT R: 50GGA GCG GGA GAA ATG GAT ATG-30
F: 50-GCA TTA CCG GTC GAT GCA ACG AGT GAT

R: 50-GAG TGA ACG AAC CTG GTC GAA ATC AGT

F: 50-GCA TTA CCG GTC GAT GCA ACG AGT GAT

R: 50-GAG TGA ACG AAC CTG GTC GAA ATC AGT

GAG-30

GCG-30

TAT-30

GAG-30

GCG-30

GAG-30

GCG-30

R26R-TdTomato

Common F: 50-AAAGTCGCTCTGAGTTGTTAT-30
Mut R: 50-GCGAAGAGTTTGTCCTCAACC-30
WT R: 50-GGAGCGGGAGAAATGGATATG-30

Etv1-CreERT2

WT F: 50-CCC TCC CCT CTC ATT TTC TC-30
Mut F: 50-TGG TTT GTC CAA ACT CAT. CAA-30
Common R: 50-ACA GTT TCT CCC ACG CTG

AC-30

Cre (E2a-Cre)

F: 50-GCG GTC TGG CAG TAA AAA CTA TC-30
R: 50-GTG AAA CAG CAT. TGC TGT CAC TT-30

R26R-GCaMP6s

Mut F: 50-ACG AGT CGG ATC TCC CTT TG-30
Mut R: 50-AGA CTG CCT TGG GAA AAG CG-30
WT F: 50-AAG GGA GCT GCA GTG GAG TA-30
WT R: 50-CCG AAA ATC TGT GGG AAG TC-30

Mut, mutant; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; WT, wild-type.

Mut: 480 bp

KAPA (KAPA

27

WT: 320 bp

Biosystems; Cat.
#KK7352), Taq
(NEB; Cat.
#M0271L)

Mut: 250 bp KAPA (KAPA

JAX genotyping

Biosystems; Cat.
#KK7352)

protocol (Stock No:
030250)

Mut: 397 bp

KAPA (KAPA

69

WT: 294 bp

WT: w200
bp

Mut: w300 bp

Biosystems; Cat.
#KK7352)

KAPA (KAPA

24 and personal

Biosystems; Cat.
#KK7352)

correspondence
with Dr Sanjay
Jain’s laboratory

408 bp

KAPA (KAPA

Biosystems; Cat.
#KK7352), Taq
(NEB)

https://mgc.wustl.edu/
protocols/pcr_
genotyping_primer_
pairs

Mut: 309 bp

KAPA (KAPA

JAX genotyping

WT: 603 bp

Biosystems; Cat.
#KK7352)

protocol (Stock No:
023139)

408 bp

KAPA (KAPA

Biosystems; Cat.
#KK7352), Taq
(NEB; Cat.
#M0271L)

408 bp

KAPA (KAPA

Biosystems; Cat.
#KK7352), Taq
(NEB; Cat.
#M0271L)

https://mgc.wustl.edu/
protocols/pcr_
genotyping_primer_
pairs

https://mgc.wustl.edu/
protocols/pcr_
genotyping_primer_
pairs

Mut: w350
bp
WT:
w600 bp

KAPA (KAPA

JAX genotyping

Biosystems; Cat.
#KK7352), Taq
(NEB; Cat.
#M0271L)

protocol (Stock No:
007900)

Mut: 170 bp

KAPA ((KAPA

JAX genotyping

WT:
459 bp

100 bp

Biosystems; Cat.
#KK7352)

protocol (Stock No:
013048)

HotStar Taq Kit
(Qiagen; Cat.
#203443)

JAX genotyping

protocol (Stock No:
003724)

Mut: 356 bp

KAPA (KAPA

JAX genotyping

WT: 297 bp

Biosystems; Cat.
#KK7352)

protocol (Stock No:
028866)

insertion. A glass bead (3 mm; Sigma-Aldrich; Cat. #Z143928)
lubricated with sunﬂower seed oil (Sigma-Aldrich; Cat.
#S5007) was inserted 2 cm into the colon using a custom-
made 3-mm rounded glass rod. The glass rod was removed,
isoﬂurane was stopped, mice were placed in empty cages, and

time to bead expulsion was recorded. If a mouse regained
consciousness before bead insertion, mice were anesthetized
for an additional 2–4 minutes. The assay was repeated 3
times per mouse (48–96 hours between procedures). Mice
had free access to food and water prior to the experiment.

1584

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

Table 7.ARRIVE Guidelines: General Animal Husbandry Information

Location of
animal facility
(types of
experiments)

Facility type

Children’s Hospital of
Philadelphia (all experiments,
except listed elsewhere)

Conventional: cages are opened at
room air, face masks are not
required when handling mice

University of Pittsburgh (live
calcium imaging experiments)

Barrier housing and maintained with
caging opened under Animal
Transfer Station/Biosafety
Cabinets

University of Melbourne (High-
magniﬁcation images of
myenteric plexus stained with
substance P and Enkephalin)

IVC (Tecniplast): cages opened under

Animal Transfer Station

Facility type

Speciﬁc pathogen free, pathogens

Speciﬁc pathogen free; sentinel

Speciﬁc pathogen free; sentinel

Animal welfare
assessment

Bedding

detected in room within the past 2
y: MNV, Helicobacter not tested
but likely present

testing for excluded pathogens
and MNV

testing for excluded pathogens
and MNV

Daily

Daily

Daily (food and water) Weekly (health

check)

1/4 inch corn cob (The Andersons,

P.J. Murphy Coarse Certiﬁed Aspen

Compressed paper-based bedding

Product 4B)

Sani-chip

Cage type

Lab Products (Seaford, DE) 75

Allentown mouse IVC

Tecniplast IVC (green line)

Cage cleaning/
sterilization

inches2 ventilated.
Standard tunnel washer

Standard tunnel washer, boxes

Rack washer (Tecniplast), steam

autoclaved before use

sterilisation

Mouse diet

Mouse Diet 5015 (Lab Diet), direct

Prolab Isopro RMH 3000 (5P75)

from manufacturer: not
autoclaved, not irradiated

irradiated

Jackson labs: LabDiet 5K52
formulation (6% fat).

Animal Facility: Barastoc WEHI Mice

Cubes, irradiated

Light/dark
cycle, h

Temperature

Humidity

Water pH and
quality

Access to food
and water

Number of mice
per cage

12/12

12/12

12/12

72 ± 2(cid:4)F
30%–70% depending on the day/

72 ± 4(cid:4)F
30%–70% depending on the day/

18–24 ± 1(cid:4)C
30%–70% depending on the day/

season

season

season

Reverse osmosis, pH w7, Edstrom
automatic watering system

Reverse osmosis, pH w7, Edstrom
automatic watering system

Filtered water bottles (down to 0.2

microns), pH w7

Continuous

1–5 (20–30 g)

Continuous

Continuous

1–4 males, 1–5 females

1–5

Cage

house/dome (Bio-Serv, S3174) and

house/dome (Bio-Serv, S3174) and

House/dome, tissues, chewing

enrichment

nestlet (Ancare)

nestlet (Ancare)

Mating strategy

Age at weaning

Continuous
19–20 d

Continuous
19–28 d

IVC, individually ventilated cage; MNV, mouse norovirus.

wooden block for single-housed
mice

Not applicable in this study
19–21 d (not applicable for this study)

Table 8.List of RT-PCR Primers

Gene

Primer sequence

Band size

Genotyping solution

Reference

Pou3f3 (mouse)

Actb (mouse)

50-CAACAGCCACGACCCTCACT-30
50-CAGAACCAGACCCGCACGAC-30
50-GAGAGGGAAATCGTGCGTGAC-30
50-AGCTCAGTAACAGTCCGCCTA-30

Casz1 (mouse)

50-GCAGAAGAGCCCTCAAAAGATAA-30
50-GAAGCAGCGTAGTCCCTCAGA-30

RT-PCR, reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction.

450 bp

KAPA (KAPA Biosystems;

Cat. #KK7352)

534 bp

KAPA (KAPA Biosystems;

Cat. #KK7352) or GoTaq Green
(Promega; Cat. #M7122)

113 bp

GoTaq Green (Promega; Cat. #M7122)

66

67

68

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1585

Table 9.List of Antibodies

Antibody

Concentration

Catalog number

Source

Rabbit anti-NOS1

Goat anti-CHAT

ANNA-1 (HuC/D)

Mouse anti-HuC/D

Goat anti-TBX3

Goat anti-PHOX2B

Rabbit anti-SATB1

Chicken anti-GFP

Rabbit anti-S100B

Rabbit anti-PBX3

Rabbit anti-TBX2

Rabbit anti-POU3F3

Rabbit anti-RBFOX1

1:200 (mouse), 1:100 (human)

1:100 (human)

N/A (mouse)

1:200 (human)

1:100 (human and mouse)

1:100 (mouse)

1:100 (mouse)

1:500 (mouse)

1:200 (mouse)

1:100 (human and mouse)

1:100 (human and mouse)

1:100 (human and mouse)

1:100 (human and mouse)

AB5380

AB144P

N/A

A21271

AF4509-SP

AF4940-SP

ab109122

#GFP-1020

Ab52642

12571-1-AP

22346-1-AP

HPA067151

HPA040809

Goat anti-BRN1 (also called

1:100 (mouse)

POU3F3 protein)

Rabbit anti-BNC2

1:100 (human and mouse)

HPA018525

Rabbit anti-Met Enkephalin

Rat anti-Substance P (NC1/34)

1:500 (mouse)

1:800 (mouse)

AB5026

AB150349

Alexa Fluor goat anti-human 647

1:400 (mouse and human)

Alexa Fluor donkey anti-rabbit 488

1:400 (mouse and human)

Alexa Fluor donkey anti-rabbit 594

1:400 (mouse and human)

Alexa Fluor donkey anti-rabbit 647

1:400 (mouse and human)

Alexa Fluor goat anti-rat 594

1:500 (mouse)

Alexa Fluor donkey anti-goat 594

1:400 (mouse and human)

Alexa Fluor goat anti-chicken 488

1:400 (mouse and human)

Alexa Fluor donkey anti-goat 647

1:400 (mouse and human)

Alexa Fluor donkey anti-goat 488

1:400 (mouse and human)

Alexa Fluor goat anti-rabbit 488

1:400 (mouse and human)

A21445

A21206

A21207

A31573

A11007

A11058

A11039

A21447

A11055

A31556

Sigma-Aldrich; RRID:AB_91824

Sigma-Aldrich; RRID:AB_2079751

Kind gift from Dr V. Lennon, Mayo Clinic
Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc, RRID:AB_221448
R&D Systems, RRID:AB_2240328

R&D Systems, RRID:AB_10889846

Abcam,

RRID:AB_10862207

Aves Labs, RRID:AB_10000240

Abcam; RRID:AB_882426

Proteintech Group; RRID:AB_2160469

Proteintech Group

Sigma-Aldrich; RRID:AB_2685790

Sigma-Aldrich; RRID:AB_10796228

Santa Cruz; no longer sold

Sigma-Aldrich;
RRID:AB_1845402

Sigma-Aldrich; RRID:AB_91644

Abcam
Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; RRID:AB_2535862
Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; RRID:AB_2535792
Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; RRID:AB_141637
Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; RRID:AB_2536183
Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; RRID:AB_10561522
Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; RRID:AB_2534105
Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; RRID:AB_142924
Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; RRID:AB_141844
Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc; RRID:AB_2534102
Thermo-Fisher Scientiﬁc;

RRID:AB_221605

N/A, not available. (Note: We do not have a catalogue number or exact concentration for this antibody since it was generated
in limited quantities from human serum and reused for each experiment).

Calcium Imaging of Full Thickness Colon

Colons from E2a-Cre;R26R-Gcamp6s mice 12–16 weeks of
age were cut longitudinally and pinned (mucosa facing down)
in a Sylgard-lined dish superfused with carbogenated (95%
O2, 5% CO2) artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid (ACSF),26 freshly
prepared, maintained at 35(cid:4)C. Nifedipine (1 mM, Sigma-
Aldrich; Cat. #N7634) in ACSF improved stability for cal-
cium imaging analyses. GCaMP6s in myenteric neurons was
imaged with an upright DM6000FS Leica ﬂuorescence mi-
croscope (Leica, Buffalo Grove, IL) and EMCCD camera
(Photometrics; Roper Scientiﬁc, Tucson, AZ) using a (cid:2)20
objective. Images were collected with Metamorph, version
7.10.1.161 (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA) at 10-Hz sam-
pling rate. For each ﬁeld, spontaneous activity was imaged 2
minutes, before two 30-second movies were collected in
response to EFS (100-ms pulse, 20 Hz, 1 second) using

concentric electrodes 5 mm oral or aboral to imaging ﬁelds
(order randomized). Recombinant rat GDNF (Cat. #512-GF;
R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) or NRTN (Cat. #450-11;
PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ) were added at 10-nM ﬁnal con-
centration (order of presentation randomized). We recorded
spontaneous activity in 2-minute movies collected intermit-
tently while ligands continuously superfused circulating
ACSF for 10 minutes. Responses to oral and aboral stimula-
tion were then reimaged. Colon was washed for 30 minutes,
and baseline activity and responses were reimaged before the
next receptor ligand was applied. In a subset of experiments,
the addition of TTX (0.5 mM; Cat. #T8024; Sigma-Aldrich)
blocked all neural transmission allowing for identiﬁcation
of myenteric neurons directly activated by GDNF or NRTN.
Spontaneous activity was recorded (three 2-minute movies)
at baseline, 10 minutes following TTX and during application

1586

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

Table 10.Numbers of Biological Replicates and Numbers of Cells/Terminals Counted

Experiment

Figure 2: enkephalin and
substance P staining
quantiﬁcation

Figure 2: Vglut-Ires-

Cre;TdTomato (cid:2) Chat-EGFP
quantiﬁcation (mouse adult
distal colon)

Figure 5: Gfra1-GFP

quantiﬁcation (mouse adult
distal colon)

Figure 5: NADPH diaphorase

staining

Figure 8: Etv1-

CreERT2;TdTomato (cid:2) NOS1
quantiﬁcation (mouse adult
distal colon)

Figure 8: PBX3 (cid:2) Chat-EGFP
quantiﬁcation (mouse adult
distal colon)

Figure 8: PHOX2B (cid:2) Chat-EGFP
quantiﬁcation (mouse adult
distal colon)

Figure 8: RBFOX1 (cid:2) Chat-EGFP
quantiﬁcation (mouse adult
distal colon)

Biological
replicate
number

3

3

3

5

3

4

4

3

Total neurons or
nerve terminals
counted

11,628 (myenteric
ganglia)

2918 (circular

muscle)

Statistical tests
used

Unpaired t test

114

614

340

1101

N/A

Student’s t test

Fisher exact test
(2 (cid:2) 2 contingency
table)
Student’s t test

2684

Student’s t test

2136

Student’s t test

993

Student’s t test

Descriptive statistics

Varicosities within myenteric ganglia:
% of Enkþ varicosities that were SPþ:
74.5 ± 23.6, 86.9 (47.3 - 89.2)
% of SPþ varicosities that were Enkþ:

81.2 ± 8.7, 78.0 (74.5 - 91.0)

Varicosities in circular muscle:
% of Enkþ varicosities that were SPþ:

76.5 ± 5.0, 78.7 (70.7 - 80.0)

% of SPþ varicosities that were Enkþ:
44.7 ± 8.4, 41.9 (41.9 - 38.2 - 54.2)

% TDTOMATOþ/EGFPþ-/HUCþ:
4.1 ± 1.5, 3.5 (3.0 - 5.8)
% TDTOMATOþ/EGFPþ/HUCþ:
95.9 ± 1.5, 96.5 (94.2 - 97.0)
% of NOS1þ that were GFPþ: 88.9 ±

1.8, 89.1 (87.0 - 90.6)

% of NOS- neurons that were GFPþ:

8.8 ± 5.7, 7.7 (3.8 - 15.0)

N/A

% of NOSþ neurons that were TDTþ:
56.4 ± 6.3, 59.7 (49.1 - 60.3)

% of NOS- neurons that were TDTþ: 5.6

± 1.5, 5.6 (4.1 - 7.1)

% of TDTOMATOþ neurons that were

NOSþ: 85.0 ± 5.8, 85.7 (78.9 - 90.5)

% of TDTOMATO neurons that were
NOS-: 15.0 ± 5.8, 14.3 (9.5 - 21.1)
% of EGFP–neurons that were PBX3þ:

31.4 ± 6.0, 29.5 (26.9 - 37.7)

% of EGFPþ neurons that were PBX3þ:

72.7 ± 5.4, 74.2 (67.1 - 76.9)

% of PBX3þ neurons that were EGFPþ:

79.2 ± 5.3, 79.4 (74.0 - 84.2)

% of PBX3þ neurons that were EGFP-:

20.8 ± 5.3, 20.6 (15.8 - 26.0)

% of EGFP–neurons that were
PHOX2Bþ: 69.9 ± 7.3, 72.0
(71.2 - 80.7)

% of EGFPþ neurons that were
PHOX2Bþ: 76.1 ± 5.1, 76.3
(62.1 - 75.6)

% of PHOX2Bþ neurons that were

EGFPþ: 60.8 ± 2.9, 62.1 (57.8 - 62.7)

% of PHOX2Bþ neurons that were

EGFP-: 39.2 ± 2.9, 37.9 (37.3 - 42.2)

% of EGFP–neurons that were
RBFOX1þ: 39.4 ± 3.8, 38.7
(36.0 - 43.6)

% of EGFPþ neurons that were
RBFOX1þ: 82.5 ± 6.7, 78.8
(78.4 - 90.2)

% of RBFOX1þ neurons that were

EGFPþ: 74.2 ± 5.8, 76.9 (67.5 - 78.1)

% of RBFOX1þ neurons that were

EGFP-: 25.8 ± 5.8, 23.1 (21.9 - 32.5)

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1587

Table 10. Continued

Experiment

Figure 8: SATB1 (cid:2) Chat-EGFP
quantiﬁcation (mouse adult
distal colon)

Figure 8: TBX3 (cid:2) NOS1

quantiﬁcation (mouse adult
distal colon)

Biological
replicate
number

Total neurons or
nerve terminals
counted

Statistical tests
used

Descriptive statistics

3

4

1028

Student’s t test

% of EGFP–neurons that were SATB1þ:

1033

Student’s t test

7.9 ± 12.3, 1.6 (0 - 22.1)
% of EGFPþ neurons that were
SATB1þ: 50.0 ± 12.0, 45.3
(41.0 - 63.5)

% of SATB1þ neurons that were

EGFPþ: 94.8 ± 7.9, 98.8 (85.7 - 100)
% of SATB1þ neurons that were EGFP-

: 5.2 ± 7.9, 1.2 (0 - 14.)

% of NOSþ/EGFP–neurons that were

TBX3þ: 90.9 ± 8.2, 92.0 (82.5 - 98.1)
% of NOSþ/EGFPþ neurons that were
TBX3þ: 86.5 ± 12.1, 85.6 (75.7 -
98.3)

% of NOS-/EGFPþ neurons that were

TBX3þ: 23.4 ± 7.7, 26.3 (15.4 - 28.5)
% of TBX3þ neurons that were EGFPþ:

31.0 ± 7.0, 34.5 (24.0 - 34.6)

% of TBX3þ neurons that were EGFP-:

69.0 ± 7.0, 65.5 (65.4 - 76)

% of TBX3þ neurons that were NOSþ:

66.0 ± 5.6, 64.5 (61.7 - 71.7)

% of TBX3þ neurons that were NOS-:

34.0 ± 5.6, 35.5 (28.3 - 38.3)

Figure 8: All neurons (mouse

adult distal colon)

3 (EGFP)

7 (NOS)

Figure 13: BNC2 (cid:2) Chat-EGFP
quantiﬁcation (mouse E17.5
mid small intestine)

Figure 13: PBX3 (cid:2) Chat-EGFP
quantiﬁcation (mouse E17.5
mid small intestine)

Figure 13: RBFOX1 (cid:2) Chat-EGFP
quantiﬁcation (mouse E17.5
mid small intestine)

3

3

3

N/A

% of total neurons that were

EGFPþ:58.1 ± 4.4, 58.8 (53.4 - 62.2)

% of total neurons that were EGFP-:
41.9 ± 4.4, 41.2 (37.8 - 46.6)
% of total neurons that were NOSþ:
38.1 ± 4.5, 39.2 (33.3 - 41.2)

% of total neurons that were NOS-: 61.9

6186

Student’s t test

10259

Student’s t test

11522

Student’s t test

± 4.5, 60.8 (58.8 - 66.7)

BNC2þEGFPþ/EGFPþ:
54.8 ± 5.2, 52.3 (51.3 - 60.8)
BNC2þEGFP–/EGFP-:
21.6 ± 1.5, 21.3 (20.3 - 23.2)
BNC2þEGFPþ/BNC2þ:
78.7 ± 1.1, 78.7 (77.5 - 79.6)
EGFPþHUCþ/HUCþ:
59.2 ± 4.4, 57.0 (56.3 - 64.3)
PBX3þEGFPþ/EGFPþ:
53.4 ± 13.3, 60.6 (38.1 - 61.5)
PBX3þEGFP–/EGFP-:
12.1 ± 9.5, 9.7 (4.0 - 22.6)
PBX3þEGFPþ/PBX3þ:
85.7 ± 8.6, 84.5 (77.7 - 94.9)
EGFPþHUCþ/HUCþ:
56.2 ± 9.6, 55.8 (46.8 - 65.9)
RBFOX1þEGFPþ/EGFPþ:
49.7 ± 9.4, 48.3 (41.0 - 59.8)
RBFOX1þEGFP–/EGFP-:
3.7 ± 2.1, 4.0 (1.5 - 5.7)
RBFOX1þEGFPþ/RBFOX1þ:
95.3 ± 2.1, 95.7 (93.1 - 97.2)
EGFPþHUCþ/HUCþ:
59.7 ± 2.8, 60.6 (56.6 - 61.9)

1588

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

Table 10. Continued

Experiment

Figure 13: TBX2 (cid:2) Chat-EGFP
quantiﬁcation (mouse E17.5
mid small intestine)

Figure 13: TBX3 (cid:2) Chat-EGFP (cid:2)
NOS1 quantiﬁcation (mouse
E17.5 mid small intestine)

Biological
replicate
number

Total neurons or
nerve terminals
counted

3

3

8369

4235

Statistical tests
used

Student’s t test

Analysis of variance
with Tukey’s post hoc
test

Figure 13: Etv1-

3

Student’s t test

CreERT2;TDTOMATO (cid:2)
NOS1 quantiﬁcation (mouse
E17.5 mid small intestine)

Figure 14:
Wnt1-Cre;Casz1 ﬂox neuron
numbers (mouse P0 mid
small intestine)

3 (control), 3
(KO)

4526 (control),
4126(KO)

Student’s t test

Figure 14: Wnt1-Cre;Tbx3 ﬂox
neuron numbers (mouse P0
mid small intestine)

3 (control), 3
(KO)

8618 (control), 3983
(KO)

Student’s t test

Figure 14: Wnt1-Cre;Rbfox1 ﬂox
neuron numbers (mouse P0
mid small intestine)

4 (control), 4
(KO)

6871 (control), 5348
(KO)

Student’s t test

Descriptive statistics

TBX2þEGFPþ/EGFPþ:
51.5 ± 4.3, 51.4 (47.3 - 55.8)
TBX2þEGFP–/EGFP-:
7.8 ± 7.3, 3.7 (3.5 - 16.2)
TBX2þEGFPþ/TBX2þ:
92.3 ± 5.1, 94.7 (86.5 - 95.8)
EGFPþHUCþ/HUCþ:
60.9 ± 5.1, 63.3 (55.0 - 64.4)
TBX3þEGFPþ/EGFPþ:
49.1 ± 6.3, 48.1 (43.3 - 55.8)
TBX3þNOS1þ/NOS1þ:
95.2 ± 1.7, 94.6 (93.8 - 97.1)
TBX3þNOS1þEGFPþ/NOS1þEGFPþ:
91.2 ± 3.9, 91.4 (87.2 - 95.0)
TBX3þEGFPþ/TBX3þ:
0.50 ± 0.04, 0.5 (0.45 - 0.53)
TBX3þNOS1þ/TBX3þ:
44.6 ± 3.2, 43.9 (41.8 - 48.1)
TBX3þEGFPþNOS1þ/TBX3þ:
5.6 ± 0.9, 5.4 (4.9 - 6.5)
EGFPþ/(sum of EGFPþ, NOS1þ,

NOS1þEGFPþ):

68.3 ± 1.6, 67.5 (67.3 - 70.2)
NOS1þ/(sum of EGFPþ, NOS1þ,

NOS1þEGFPþ):

31.1 ± 1.7, 32.0 (29.2 - 32.1)
EGFPþNOS1þ/(sum of EGFPþ,
NOS1þ, NOS1þEGFPþ):

0.8 ± 0.0, 0.8 (0.8 - 0.9)
TDTOMATOþNOS1þ/NOS1þ:
14.86 ± 3.59, 13.59 (12.41 - 18.57)
TDTOMATOþ/NOS1–/NOS1–:
3.59 ± 0.59, 3.65 (2.98 - 4.15)
% Chat-EGFPþ neurons:
KO: 51.6 ± 6.0, 48.3 (43.3 - 63.3)
Control: 45.3 ± 3.9, 44.57 (39.0 - 52.3)
Total neuron density:
KO: 3044 ± 812.2, 2891 (2320 - 3922)
Control: 3339 ± 89.0, 3294 (3283 - 3442)
% NOS1þ neurons:
KO: 18.2 ± 3.3, 17.4 (15.3 - 21.9)
Control: 26.0 ± 3.0, 26.4 (22.8 - 28.8)
Total Neuron Density:
KO: 2180 ± 403.2, 2075 (1839 - 2625)
Control: 2337 ± 260.6, 2302 (2096 -

2613)

% Chat-EGFPþ neurons:
KO: 47.4 ± 2.9, 47.3 (44.8 - 50.0)
Control: 53.6 ± 7.3, 53.6 (46.6 - 60.7)
Total Neuron Density:
KO: 1603 ± 352.2, 1589 (1273 - 1947)
Control: 1789 ± 364.6, 1903 (1413 -

2078)

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1589

Table 10. Continued

Experiment

Figure 14: Wnt1-Cre;Tbx2 ﬂox
neuron numbers (mouse P0
mid small intestine)

Figure 19: BNC2 (cid:2) CHAT

quantiﬁcation (human colon)

Figure 19: PBX3 (cid:2) CHAT

quantiﬁcation (human colon)

Figure 19: RBFOX1 (cid:2) CHAT

quantiﬁcation (human colon)

Figure 19: TBX2 (cid:2) CHAT

quantiﬁcation (human colon)

Figure 19: TBX3 (cid:2) NOS1

quantiﬁcation (human colon)

Biological
replicate
number

Total neurons or
nerve terminals
counted

4 (control), 3
(KO)

5911 (control),
2581 (KO)

Statistical tests
used

Student’s t test

MWRST

Descriptive statistics

% Chat-EGFPþ neurons:
KO: 46.15 ± 6.678, 46.3 (39.4 - 52.8)
Control: 45.6 ± 7.741, 44.75 (38.6 - 53.5)
Total Neuron Density:
KO: 1844 ± 1005, 1754 (886.8 - 2891)
Control: 1839 ± 166.8, 1846 (1680 -

3

3

3

3

3

2675

Student’s t test

2439

Student’s t test

2825

Student’s t test

3427

Student’s t test

972

Student’s t test

1992)

BNC2þCHATþ/CHATþ:
36.6 ± 4.1, 34.3 (34.2 - 41.3)
BNC2þCHAT-/CHAT-:
1.6 ± 1.3, 0.8 (0.8 - 3.1)
BNC2þCHATþ/BNC2þ:
97.9 ± 1.3, 97.9 (96.6 - 99.2)
CHATþHUCþ/HUCþ:
66.6 ± 11.8, 60.0 (59.6 - 80.1)
PBX3þCHATþ/CHATþ:
19.0 ± 4.3, 19.9 (14.3 - 22.8)
PBX3þCHAT-/CHAT-:
1.1 ± 0.3, 1.1 (0.8 - 1.4)
PBX3þCHATþ/PBX3þ:
97.5 ± 1.1, 97.2 (96.5 - 98.7)
CHATþHUCþ/HUCþ:
68.7 ± 6.9, 67.7 (62.3 - 76.1)
RBFOX1þCHATþ/CHATþ:
44.4 ± 7.7, 41.4 (38.8 - 53.1)
RBFOX1þCHAT-/CHAT-:
1.5 ± 1.4, 1.6 (0 - 2.7)
RBFOX1þCHATþ/RBFOXþ:
99.4 ± 0.5, 99.3 (99.0 - 100.0)
CHATþHUCþ/HUCþ:
87.4 ± 2.7, 86.9 (85.0 - 90.3)
TBX2þCHATþ/CHATþ:
7.8 ± 2.8, 6.2 (6.2 - 11.0)
TBX2þCHAT-/CHAT-:
0.1 ± 0.1, 0.1 (0 - 0.2)
TBX2þCHATþ/TBX2þ:
99.4 ± 0.5, 99.3 (99.0 - 100.0)
CHATþHUCþ/HUCþ:
69.6 ± 12.9, 72.5 (55.5 - 80.9)
TBX3þNOS1þ/NOS1þ:
90.0 ± 9.7, 92.4 (79.2 - 98.2)
TBX3þNOS1–/NOS1–:
16.4 ± 6.5, 14.9 (10.7 - 23.5)
TBX3þNOS1þ/TBX3þ:
83.5 ± 8.9, 83.3 (74.6 - 92.4)
NOS1þHUCþ/HUCþ:
49.1 ± 7.8, 47.3 (42.4 - 57.7)

Values are mean ± SD, median (range).
EGFP, enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein; KO, knockout; N/A, not available; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate; NOS1, neuronal nitric oxide synthase.

of GDNF or NRTN (in the presence of TTX; order of presen-
tation of GDNF/NRTN was randomized). Colon tissue was
then “washed” with the TTX, activity was reimaged, and the
next receptor ligand was applied while imaging responses.

Analysis of Live GCaMP6s Imaging

Metamorph (Molecular Devices, Downington, PA) image
ﬁles exported to ImageJ were coded for blinded analysis.
Circular regions of interest were drawn on all myenteric

1590

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

neurons in each ﬁeld. Amplitude of GCaMP6s signals were
analyzed and quantiﬁed as described.62 We calculated DF/
F0 [% ¼ ((F (cid:6) F0)/F0) (cid:2) 100], where F is peak ﬂuorescence
and F0 is baseline mean ﬂuorescence; DF/F0 of 4SD >
baseline was considered a response. Time control studies, in
which GCaMP6s activity from individual neurons was
measured over time, were used to determine whether
changes in activity were signiﬁcantly altered due to GDNF or
NRTN application. Tissue movement along x- and y-axes
was measured using ImageJ Template-Matching plugin.
Time-lapse color-coded images created in ImageJ use pixel
color to indicate when pixels reached maximum F, providing
spatial and temporal information about activity.

Statistics

We used Prism 7.03 software (GraphPad Software, San
Diego, CA). A cutoff of P < .05 was considered signiﬁcant.
Data represent mean ± SEM.

References
1. Schneider S, Wright CM, Heuckeroth RO. Unexpected
roles for the second brain: enteric nervous system as
master regulator of bowel function. Annual Review of
Physiology 2019;81:235–259.

2. McCann CJ, Thapar N. Enteric neural stem cell therapies
for enteric neuropathies. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2018;
30:e13369.

3. Soret R, Schneider S, Bernas G, Christophers B,
Souchkova O, Charrier B, Righini-Grunder F, Aspirot A,
Landry M, Kembel SW, Faure C, Heuckeroth RO, Pilon N.
Glial cell derived neurotrophic factor induces enteric
neurogenesis and improves colon structure and function
in mouse models of Hirschsprung disease. Gastroen-
terology 2020;159:1824–1838.e7.

4. Memic F, Knoﬂach V, Morarach K, Sadler R, Laranjeira C,
Hjerling-Lefﬂer J, Sundström E, Pachnis V, Marklund U.
Transcription and signaling regulators in developing
neuronal subtypes of mouse and human enteric nervous
system. Gastroenterology 2018;154:624–636.

5. Morarach K, Mikhailova A, Knoﬂach V, Memic F,
Kumar R, Li W, Ernfors P, Marklund U. Diversiﬁcation of
molecularly deﬁned myenteric neuron classes revealed
by single-cell RNA sequencing. Nat Neurosci 2021;
24:34–46.

6. Zeisel A, Hochgerner H, Lönnerberg P, Johnsson A,
Memic F, van der Zwan J, Häring M, Braun E,
Borm LE, La Manno G, Codeluppi S, Furlan A, Lee K,
Skene N, Harris KD, Hjerling-Lefﬂer J, Arenas E,
Ernfors P, Marklund U, Linnarsson S. Molecular ar-
chitecture of the mouse nervous system. Cell 2018;
174:999–1014.e22.

7. May-Zhang AA, Tycksen E, Southard-Smith AN,
Deal KK, Benthal JT, Buehler DP, Adam M, Simmons AJ,
Monaghan JR, Matlock BK, Flaherty DK, Potter SS,
Lau KS, Southard-Smith EM. Combinatorial transcrip-
tional proﬁling of mouse and human enteric neurons
identiﬁes shared and disparate subtypes in situ.
Gastroenterology 2020 Sep 30 [E-pub ahead of print].

8. Drokhlyansky E, Smillie CS, Van Wittenberghe N,
Ericsson M, Grifﬁn GK, Eraslan G, Dionne D,
Cuoco MS, Goder-Reiser MN, Sharova T, Kuksenko O,
Aguirre AJ, Boland GM, Graham D, Rozenblatt-
Rosen O, Xavier RJ, Regev A. The human and mouse
enteric nervous system at single-cell resolution. Cell
2020;182:1606–1622.e23.

9. Lasrado R, Boesmans W, Kleinjung J, Pin C, Bell D,
Bhaw L, McCallum S, Zong H, Luo L, Clevers H, Vanden
Berghe P, Pachnis V. Lineage-dependent spatial and
functional organization of the mammalian enteric ner-
vous system. Science 2017;356:722–726.

10. Lomax AE, Furness JB. Neurochemical classiﬁcation of
enteric neurons in the guinea-pig distal colon. Cell Tissue
Res 2000;302:59–72.

11. Knowles CH, Veress B, Kapur RP, Wedel T, Farrugia G,
Vanderwinden J-M, Geboes K, Smith VV, Martin JE,
Lindberg G, Milla PJ, De Giorgio R. Quantitation of
cellular components of the enteric nervous system in the
normal human gastrointestinal tract–report on behalf of
the Gastro 2009 International Working Group. Neuro-
gastroenterol Motil 2011;23:115–124.

12. Sang Q, Young HM. Chemical coding of neurons in the
myenteric plexus and external muscle of the small and
large intestine of the mouse. Cell Tissue Res 1996;
284:39–53.

13. Graham KD, López SH, Sengupta R, Shenoy A,
Schneider S, Wright CM, Feldman M, Furth E,
Valdivieso F, Lemke A, Wilkins BJ, Naji A, Doolin E,
Howard MJ, Heuckeroth RO. Robust, 3-dimensional
visualization of human colon enteric nervous system
without
tissue sectioning. Gastroenterology 2020;
158:2221–2235.e5.

14. Jiang Y, Dong H, Eckmann L, Hanson EM,

Ihn KC,
Mittal RK. Visualizing the enteric nervous system using
genetically engineered double reporter mice: comparison
with immunoﬂuorescence. PLoS One 2017;12:e0171239.
15. Lake JI, Avetisyan M, Zimmermann AG, Heuckeroth RO.
Neural crest requires Impdh2 for development of the
enteric nervous system, great vessels, and craniofacial
skeleton. Dev Biol 2016;409:152–165.

16. Brokhman I, Xu J, Coles BLK, Razavi R, Engert S,
Lickert H, Babona-Pilipos R, Morshead CM, Sibley E,
Chen C, van der Kooy D. Dual embryonic origin of the
mammalian enteric nervous system. Dev Biol 2019;
445:256–270.

17. Stuart T, Butler A, Hoffman P, Hafemeister C, Papalexi E,
Mauck WM 3rd, Hao Y, Stoeckius M, Smibert P, Satija R.
Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 2019;
177:1888–1902.e21.

18. Qu Z-D, Thacker M, Castelucci P, Bagyánszki M,
Epstein ML, Furness JB. Immunohistochemical analysis
of neuron types in the mouse small intestine. Cell Tissue
Res 2008;334:147–161.

19. Furness JB, Costa M, Miller RJ. Distribution and pro-
jections of nerves with enkephalin-like immunoreactivity
in the guinea-pig small
intestine. Neuroscience 1983;
8:653–664.

20. Bornstein JC, Costa M, Furness JB, Lees GM. Electro-
physiology and enkephalin immunoreactivity of identiﬁed

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1591

myenteric plexus neurones of guinea-pig small intestine.
J Physiol 1984;351:313–325.
21. Swaminathan M, Hill-Yardin

JC,
Foong JPP. Endogenous glutamate excites myenteric
calbindin neurons by activating group I metabotropic
glutamate receptors in the mouse colon. Front Neurosci
2019;13:426.

EL, Bornstein

22. Sang Q, Young HM. The identiﬁcation and chemical
coding of cholinergic neurons in the small and large in-
testine of the mouse. Anat Rec 1998;251:185–199.
23. Heuckeroth RO, Enomoto H, Grider JR, Golden JP,
Hanke JA, Jackman A, Molliver DC, Bardgett ME,
Snider WD, Johnson EM Jr, Milbrandt J. Gene targeting
reveals a critical role for neurturin in the development and
maintenance of enteric, sensory, and parasympathetic
neurons. Neuron 1999;22:253–263.

24. Uesaka T, Jain S, Yonemura S, Uchiyama Y, Milbrandt J,
Enomoto H. Conditional ablation of GFRa1 in post-
triggers unconventional
migratory enteric neurons
neuronal death in the colon and causes a Hirschsprung’s
disease phenotype. Development 2007;134:2171–2181.
25. Grider JR, Heuckeroth RO, Kuemmerle JF, Murthy KS.
Augmentation of the ascending component of the peri-
staltic reﬂex and substance P release by glial cell line-
derived neurotrophic factor. Neurogastroenterol Motil
2010;22:779–786.

26. Smith-Edwards KM, Najjar SA, Edwards BS, Howard MJ,
Albers KM, Davis BM. Extrinsic primary afferent neurons
link visceral pain to colon motility through a spinal reﬂex
in mice. Gastroenterology 2019;157:522–536.e2.

27. López SH, Avetisyan M, Wright CM, Mesbah K, Kelly RG,
Moon AM, Heuckeroth RO. Loss of Tbx3 in murine neural
crest reduces enteric glia and causes cleft palate, but
does not inﬂuence heart development or bowel transit.
Dev Biol 2018;444(Suppl 1):S337–S351.

28. Lake JI, Heuckeroth RO. Enteric nervous system devel-
opment: migration, differentiation, and disease. Am J
Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2013;305:G1–G24.
29. Wright CM, Garifallou JP, Schneider S, Mentch HL,
Kothakapa DR, Maguire BA, Heuckeroth RO. Dlx1/2
mice have abnormal enteric nervous system function.
JCI Insight 2020;5:e131494.

30. Hao MM, Bornstein JC, Young HM. Development of
myenteric cholinergic neurons in ChAT-Cre;R26R-YFP
mice. J Comp Neurol 2013;521:3358–3370.

31. Bergner AJ, Stamp LA, Gonsalvez DG, Allison MB,
Olson DP, Myers MG Jr, Anderson CR, Young HM.
Birthdating of myenteric neuron subtypes in the small in-
testine of the mouse. J Comp Neurol 2014;522:514–527.
32. Liu M-T, Kuan Y-H, Wang J, Hen R, Gershon MD. 5-HT4
receptor-mediated neuroprotection and neurogenesis in
the enteric nervous system of adult mice. J Neurosci
2009;29:9683–9699.

33. Obata Y, Castaño Á, Boeing S, Bon-Frauches AC,
Fung C, Fallesen T, de Agüero MG, Yilmaz B, Lopes R,
Huseynova A, Horswell S, Maradana MR, Boesmans W,
Vanden Berghe P, Murray AJ, Stockinger B,
Macpherson AJ, Pachnis V. Neuronal programming by
microbiota regulates intestinal physiology. Nature 2020;
578:284–289.

34. Osterwalder M, Speziale D, Shoukry M, Mohan R,
Ivanek R, Kohler M, Beisel C, Wen X, Scales SJ,
Christoffels VM, Visel A, Lopez-Rios J, Zeller R. HAND2
targets deﬁne a network of transcriptional regulators that
compartmentalize the early limb bud mesenchyme. Dev
Cell 2014;31:345–357.

35. Lei J, Howard MJ. Targeted deletion of Hand2 in enteric
neural precursor cells affects its functions in neuro-
genesis, neurotransmitter speciﬁcation and ganglio-
genesis, causing functional aganglionosis. Development
2011;138:4789–4800.

36. Monteiro CB, Midão L, Rebelo S, Reguenga C, Lima D,
Monteiro FA. Zinc ﬁnger
transcription factor Casz1
expression is regulated by homeodomain transcription
factor Prrxl1 in embryonic spinal dorsal horn late-born
excitatory
2016;
43:1449–1459.

interneurons.

J Neurosci

Eur

37. Mattar P, Stevanovic M, Nad I, Cayouette M. Casz1
controls higher-order nuclear organization in rod photo-
receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018;
115:E7987–E7996.

38. Alvarez-Delﬁn K, Morris AC, Snelson CD, Gamse JT,
Gupta T, Marlow FL, Mullins MC, Burgess HA,
Granato M, Fadool JM. Tbx2b is required for ultraviolet
photoreceptor cell speciﬁcation during zebraﬁsh retinal
development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;
106:2023–2028.

39. Cho G-S, Park D-S, Choi S-C, Han J-K. Tbx2 regulates
anterior neural speciﬁcation by repressing FGF signaling
pathway. Dev Biol 2017;421:183–193.

40. Zhang X, Chen MH, Wu X, Kodani A, Fan J, Doan R,
Ozawa M, Ma J, Yoshida N, Reiter JF, Black DL,
Kharchenko PV, Sharp PA, Walsh CA. Cell-type–speciﬁc
alternative splicing governs cell fate in the developing
cerebral cortex. Cell 2016;166:1147–1162.e15.

41. Sugitani Y, Nakai S, Minowa O, Nishi M, Jishage K-I,
Kawano H, Mori K, Ogawa M, Noda T. Brn-1 and Brn-2
share crucial roles in the production and positioning of
mouse neocortical neurons. Genes Dev 2002;16:1760–1765.
42. Snijders Blok L, Kleefstra T, Venselaar H, Maas S,
Kroes HY, Lachmeijer AMA, van Gassen KLI, Firth HV,
Tomkins S, Bodek S, Õunap K, Wojcik MH, Cunniff C,
Bergstrom K, Powis Z, Tang S, Shinde DN, Au C,
Iglesias AD,
Izumi K, Leonard J, Abou Tayoun A,
Baker SW, Tartaglia M, Niceta M, Dentici ML,
Okamoto N, Miyake N, Matsumoto N, Vitobello A,
Faivre L, Philippe C, Gilissen C, Wiel L, Pfundt R,
Deriziotis P, Brunner HG, Fisher SE. De novo variants
disturbing the transactivation capacity of POU3F3 cause
a characteristic neurodevelopmental disorder. Am J Hum
Genet 2019;105:403–412.

43. Dastot-Le Moal F, Wilson M, Mowat D, Collot N,
Niel F, Goossens M. ZFHX1B mutations in patients
with Mowat-Wilson syndrome. Hum Mutat 2007;
28:313–321.

44. Coyle D, Puri P. Hirschsprung’s disease in children with
Mowat-Wilson syndrome. Pediatr Surg Int 2015;
31:711–717.

45. Zhang Z, Li Q, Diao M, Liu N, Cheng W, Xiao P, Zou J, Su L,
Yu K, Wu J, Li L, Jiang Q. Sporadic Hirschsprung disease:

1592

Wright et al

Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology Vol. 11, No. 5

mutational spectrum and novel candidate genes revealed
by next-generation sequencing. Sci Rep 2017;7:14796.
46. Nurgali K, Stebbing MJ, Furness JB. Correlation of
electrophysiological and morphological characteristics
of enteric neurons in the mouse colon. J Comp Neurol
2004;468:112–124.

47. Furness JB, Robbins HL, Xiao J, Stebbing MJ, Nurgali K.
Projections and chemistry of Dogiel type II neurons in the
mouse colon. Cell Tissue Res 2004;317:1–12.

48. Mazzuoli G, Schemann M. Multifunctional

rapidly
adapting mechanosensitive enteric neurons (RAMEN) in
the myenteric plexus of the guinea pig ileum. J Physiol
2009;587:4681–4694.

49. Avetisyan M, Wang H, Schill EM, Bery S, Grider JR,
Hassell JA, Stappenbeck T, Heuckeroth RO. Hepatocyte
growth factor and MET support mouse enteric nervous
system development, the peristaltic response, and in-
testinal epithelial proliferation in response to injury.
Journal of Neuroscience 2015;35:11543–11558.

50. Morarach K, Memic F, Zeisel A, Hochgerner H,
Marklund U, Linnarsson S. Single-cell molecular inter-
rogation of enteric nervous system development. Mech
Dev 2017;145:S67.

51. Rossi

J, Herzig K-H, Võikar V, Hiltunen PH,
Segerstråle M, Airaksinen MS. Alimentary tract innerva-
tion deﬁcits and dysfunction in mice lacking GDNF family
receptor alpha2. J Clin Invest 2003;112:707–716.
52. Creedon DJ, Tansey MG, Baloh RH, Osborne PA,
Lampe PA, Fahrner TJ, Heuckeroth RO, Milbrandt J,
Johnson EM Jr. Neurturin shares receptors and signal
transduction pathways with glial cell line-derived neuro-
trophic factor in sympathetic neurons. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1997;94:7018–7023.

53. Baloh RH, Tansey MG, Golden JP, Creedon DJ,
Heuckeroth RO, Keck CL, Zimonjic DB, Popescu NC,
Johnson EM Jr, Milbrandt J. TrnR2, a novel receptor that
mediates neurturin and GDNF signaling through Ret.
Neuron 1997;18:793–802.

54. Klein RD, Sherman D, Ho WH, Stone D, Bennett GL, Moffat B,
Vandlen R, Simmons L, Gu Q, Hongo JA, Devaux B,
Poulsen K, Armanini M, Nozaki C, Asai N, Goddard A,
Phillips H, Henderson CE, Takahashi M, Rosenthal A. A GPI-
linked protein that interacts with Ret to form a candidate
neurturin receptor. Nature 1997;387:717–721.

55. Malin SA, Molliver DC, Koerber HR, Cornuet P, Frye R,
Albers KM, Davis BM. Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor family members sensitize nociceptors in vitro and
produce thermal hyperalgesia in vivo. J Neurosci 2006;
26:8588–8599.

56. Gianino S, Grider JR, Cresswell J, et al. GDNF availability
determines enteric neuron number by controlling pre-
cursor proliferation. Development 2003;130:2187–2198.
IC, Emerson M,
Altman DG. Improving bioscience research reporting: the
ARRIVE guidelines for reporting animal research. Oste-
oarthritis Cartilage 2012;20:256–260.

57. Kilkenny C, Browne WJ, Cuthill

58. Dobin A, Davis CA, Schlesinger F, Drenkow J, Zaleski C,
Jha S, Batut P, Chaisson M, Gingeras TR. STAR: ultra-
fast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 2013;
29:15–21.

59. Butler A, Hoffman P, Smibert P, Papalexi E, Satija R.
across
technologies, and species. Nat

Integrating single-cell
different conditions,
Biotechnol 2018;36:411–420.

transcriptomic data

Available

60. Piper M, Pantano L, Mistry M, Khetani R. Single-cell RNA-
in-depth-NGS-data-analysis-
seq: clustering analysis.
course,
https://hbctraining.github.io/
at:
In-depth-NGS-Data-Analysis-Course/sessionIV/lessons/
SC_clustering_analysis.html. Accessed July 3, 2020.
61. Dent JA, Polson AG, Klymkowsky MW. A whole-mount
immunocytochemical analysis of the expression of the
intermediate ﬁlament protein vimentin in Xenopus.
Development 1989;105:61–74.

62. Smith-Edwards KM, DeBerry JJ, Saloman JL, Davis BM,
Woodbury CJ. Profound alteration in cutaneous primary
afferent activity produced by inﬂammatory mediators.
Elife 2016;5:e20527.

63. Spencer NJ, Smith TK. Mechanosensory S-neurons
rather than AH-neurons appear to generate a rhythmic
motor pattern in guinea-pig distal colon. J Physiol 2004;
558:577–596.

64. Sang Q, Williamson S, Young HM. Projections of
chemically identiﬁed myenteric neurons of the small and
large intestine of the mouse. J Anat 1997;190:209–222.
65. Branchek TA, Gershon MD. Time course of expression of
neuropeptide Y, calcitonin gene-related peptide, and
NADPH diaphorase activity in neurons of the developing
5-
the
murine
hydroxytryptamine in mucosal enterochromafﬁn cells.
J Comp Neurol 1989;285:262–273.

appearance

bowel

and

of

66. Jin Z, Liu L, Bian W, Chen Y, Xu G, Cheng L, Jing N.
Different
transcription factors regulate nestin gene
expression during P19 cell neural differentiation and
central nervous system development. J Biol Chem 2009;
284:8160–8173.

67. Ngan ES-W, Garcia-Barceló M-M, Yip BH-K, Poon H-C,
Lau S-T, Kwok CK-M, Sat E, Sham M-H, Wong KK-Y,
Wainwright BJ, Cherny SS, Hui C-C, Sham PC, Lui VC-
H, Tam PK-H. Hedgehog/Notch-induced premature
gliogenesis represents a new disease mechanism for
Hirschsprung disease in mice and humans. J Clin Invest
2011;121:3467–3478.

68. Liu Z, Zhang X, Lei H, Lam N, Carter S, Yockey O, Xu M,
Mendoza A, Hernandez ER, Wei JS, Khan J, Yohe ME,
Shern JF, Thiele CJ. CASZ1 induces skeletal muscle and
rhabdomyosarcoma differentiation through a feed-
forward loop with MYOD and MYOG. Nat Commun
2020;11:911.

69. Gehman LT, Stoilov P, Maguire J, Damianov A, Lin C-H,
Shiue L, Ares M Jr, Mody I, Black DL. The splicing
regulator Rbfox1 (A2BP1) controls neuronal excitation in
the mammalian brain. Nat Genet 2011;43:706–711.

Received September 23, 2020. Accepted December 30, 2020.

Correspondence
Address correspondence to: Robert O. Heuckeroth, MD, PhD, The Children’s
Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania, Abramson Research Center, Suite 1116I,
3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-4318. e-mail:
heuckerothr@chop.edu; fax: (215) 590-3324.

2021

New Enteric Nervous System Roles for GDNF, NRTN, and TBX3 1593

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr Emma Furth, Dr Federico Valdivieso, Dr Michael Feldman,
Dr Ali Naji, Rachel H. Céron, Silvia Huerta López, Caitlin Feltcher, Andrew
Kromer, Lauren Schmucker, and Jennifer Finan for help acquiring human
tissue. The authors also thank Scott Gianino for POU3F3 initial studies.

CRediT Authorship Contributions

Christina M. Wright, PhD (Conceptualization: Lead; Data curation: Lead;
Investigation: Lead;
Formal analysis: Lead; Funding acquisition: Lead;
Methodology: Lead; Validation: Lead; Visualization: Lead; Writing – original
draft: Lead; Writing – review & editing: Lead)

Sabine Schneider, BS (Conceptualization: Lead; Data curation: Lead; Formal
analysis: Lead;
Investigation: Lead; Methodology: Lead; Validation: Lead;
Visualization: Lead; Writing – original draft: Lead; Writing – review & editing:
Lead)

Kristen M. Smith-Edwards, PhD (Conceptualization: Supporting; Data
curation: Supporting; Formal analysis: Supporting; Funding acquisition:
Supporting; Investigation: Supporting; Methodology: Supporting; Validation:
Supporting; Visualization: Supporting; Writing – original draft: Supporting;
Writing – review & editing: Supporting)

Fernanda Mafra, MS PhD (Investigation: Supporting; Methodology:

Supporting; Writing – review & editing: Supporting)

Anita

Leembruggen, MBiomedSci
Methodology: Supporting; Writing – review & editing: Supporting)

J.L.

(Investigation: Supporting;

Michael V. Gonzalez, BS (Data curation: Supporting; Formal analysis:
Investigation: Supporting; Methodology: Supporting; Writing –

Supporting;
review & editing: Supporting)

Deepika R. Kothakapa, BS Candidate

(Investigation: Supporting;

Methodology: Supporting; Writing – review & editing: Supporting)

Jessica B. Anderson, BA Candidate

(Investigation: Supporting;

Methodology: Supporting; Writing – review & editing: Supporting)

Beth A. Maguire, BS (Investigation: Supporting; Methodology: Supporting;

Writing – review & editing: Supporting)

Tao Gao, PhD (Investigation: Supporting; Methodology: Supporting; Writing

– review & editing: Supporting)

Tricia A. Missall, MD PhD (Investigation: Supporting; Methodology:

Supporting; Writing – review & editing: Supporting)

Marthe J. Howard, PhD (Conceptualization: Supporting; Funding acquisition:
Investigation: Supporting; Methodology: Supporting; Writing –

Supporting;
review & editing: Supporting)

Joel C. Bornstein, PhD (Conceptualization: Supporting;

Investigation:
Supporting; Methodology: Supporting; Writing – review & editing: Supporting)
Brian M. Davis, PhD (Conceptualization: Supporting; Funding acquisition:
Investigation: Supporting; Methodology: Supporting; Writing –

Supporting;
review & editing: Supporting)

Robert O. Heuckeroth, MD PhD (Conceptualization: Lead; Data curation:
Lead; Formal analysis: Lead; Funding acquisition: Lead; Investigation: Lead;
administration: Lead; Resources: Lead;
Methodology: Lead; Project
Supervision: Lead; Validation: Lead; Visualization: Lead; Writing – original
draft: Lead; Writing – review & editing: Lead)

Conﬂicts of Interest
This author discloses the following: Robert O. Heuckeroth is a consultant for
BlueRock Therapeutics and has served on a scientiﬁc advisory board for
Takeda. The remaining authors disclose no conﬂicts.

Funding
This work was supported by the Irma and Norman Braman Endowment; the
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute; the Suzi and Scott
Institutes of Health grants 5 F30
Lustgarten Center Endowment; National
DK117546-02 (to Christina M. Wright), F32 DK120115 (to Kristen M.
Smith-Edwards), and R01DK122798 (PI: Brian Davis; co-PIs: Robert
Institutes of Health SPARC
Heuckeroth, Marthe Howard); and National
(Stimulating
program
to
OT2OD023859 (PI: Marthe Howard; co-PIs: Robert Heuckeroth, Brian
Davis, Joel Bornstein).

Conditions)

Peripheral

Activity

Relieve

