Cell and Tissue Research (2020) 382:201–231
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00441-020-03279-6

REVIEW

The diversity of neuronal phenotypes in rodent and human
autonomic ganglia

Uwe Ernsberger 1 & Thomas Deller 1 & Hermann Rohrer 1

Received: 6 July 2020 / Accepted: 10 August 2020
# The Author(s) 2020

/ Published online: 15 September 2020

Abstract
Selective sympathetic and parasympathetic pathways that act on target organs represent the terminal actors in the neurobiology of
homeostasis and often become compromised during a range of neurodegenerative and traumatic disorders. Here, we delineate
several neurotransmitter and neuromodulator phenotypes found in diverse parasympathetic and sympathetic ganglia in humans
and rodent species. The comparative approach reveals evolutionarily conserved and non-conserved phenotypic marker constel-
lations. A developmental analysis examining the acquisition of selected neurotransmitter properties has provided a detailed, but
still incomplete, understanding of the origins of a set of noradrenergic and cholinergic sympathetic neuron populations, found in
the cervical and trunk region. A corresponding analysis examining cholinergic and nitrergic parasympathetic neurons in the head,
and a range of pelvic neuron populations, with noradrenergic, cholinergic, nitrergic, and mixed transmitter phenotypes, remains
open. Of particular interest are the molecular mechanisms and nuclear processes that are responsible for the correlated expression
of the various genes required to achieve the noradrenergic phenotype, the segregation of cholinergic locus gene expression, and
the regulation of genes that are necessary to generate a nitrergic phenotype. Unraveling the neuron population-specific expression
of adhesion molecules, which are involved in axonal outgrowth, pathway selection, and synaptic organization, will advance the
study of target-selective autonomic pathway generation.

Keywords Sympathetic . Parasympathetic . Pelvic . Neurotransmitter . Neuron

Abbreviations
CIL
SPG
PTG

SMG
OG
SCG
STG
CG
SMG
IMG
APG
MPG

Ciliary ganglion
Sphenopalatine ganglion
Corresponding to the human
pterygopalatine ganglion
Submandibular ganglion
Otic ganglion
Superior cervical ganglion
Stellate ganglion
Celiac ganglion
Superior mesenteric ganglion
Inferior mesenteric ganglia
Anterior pelvic ganglion
Major pelvic ganglion

Pelvic plexus
PP
Catecholamine
CA
Tyrosine hydroxylase
TH
Dopamine beta-hydroxylase
DBH
ChAT
Choline acetyltransferase
VAChT Vesicular acetylcholine transporter
NO
NOS
VIP
NPY
SOM
Pcdhn

Nitrogen monoxide
Nitrogen monoxide synthase
Vasoactive intestinal peptide
Neuropeptide Y
Somatostatin
Protocadherin

Introduction

* Hermann Rohrer

rohrer@med.uni-frankfurt.de

1

Institute of Clinical Neuroanatomy, Dr. Senckenberg Anatomy,
Neuroscience Center, Goethe University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7,
60590 Frankfurt/M, Germany

The autonomic nervous system (ANS) in mammals functions
to ensure the maintenance of body homeostasis under highly
variable conditions, which allows mammals to access remark-
ably diverse environments, such as those experienced by div-
ing animals (Scholander 1940; McCulloch 2012) and animals

202

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

that roam desert habitats (Ouajd and Kamel 2009). The dis-
ruption of proper ANS functions in humans, associated with
disease processes or trauma, can result in a wide range of
cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and urogenital dysfunctions
(Rafanelli et al. 2019), as are observed in Parkinson’s disease
(Chen et al. 2020) and other synucleopathies (Mendoza-
Velasquez et al. 2019) or immune-mediated ailments, such
as multiple sclerosis (Pinter et al. 2015; Ernsberger 2019).

Homeostatic control is communicated by peripheral auto-
nomic neurons in the parasympathetic and sympathetic ner-
vous system (Langley 1921; Jänig 2006), which provide
target-specific neuronal pathways that act on a variety of tar-
get organs, especially those associated with the cardiovascular
system and pelvic organs, but also skin, bones, fat, lymphatic
tissue, and the various internal organs. These two domains of
the ANS are complemented by a third domain, the enteric
nervous system, which was distinguished in the early defini-
tion of the autonomic nervous system (Langley 1921) and is
composed of two intramural nerve plexuses that traverse and
innervate the gut, regulating its activity. In the pelvic region,
another nerve plexus, including extramural and intramural
ganglia, innervates terminal gut segments and the urogenital
system, to orchestrate their activities. The developmental his-
tory and nomenclature associated with the ANS have received
critical attention in recent years (Espinosa-Medina et al. 2016;
Ernsberger and Rohrer 2018; Horn 2018). Here, we chose to
discuss the pelvic ganglia and plexus, in comparison with the
cranial parasympathetic system and the cervical and trunk
sympathetic ganglia and neurons. The distinct cellular and
histological organization of the neuronal cell clusters arranged
along the autonomic pelvic nerve fiber tracts, together with
their mixed neurotransmitter and modulator constellations,
which only partially overlap with either sympathetic or para-
sympathetic neurochemistry, render this choice obvious. The
enteric nervous system is similarly distinguished from the pel-
vic plexus (PP) by distinct histological, neurochemical, and
developmental organizations but will not be discussed here.

With the discovery of acetylcholine (Dale and Feldberg
1934) and noradrenaline (von Euler 1966), which are the
key transmitters of the sympathetic and parasympathetic sys-
tems, respectively, the highly fruitful study of ANS physiolo-
gy and biochemistry began. The initial characterization of
these two classical neurotransmitters was further extended
by the recognition of a range of neuromodulators, including
purines, nitrogen monoxide (NO), and neuropeptides, which
are involved in autonomic signaling processes (Lundberg
1996; Burnstock 2013; Ignarro 2019).

With the characterization of the enzymes involved in the
synthesis of neurotransmitters and modulators and the advent
of immunohistochemistry, RNA in situ hybridization, and
single-cell RNA sequencing, the cellular and molecular char-
acterization of peripheral neuronal elements and their devel-
opment became possible. The results of these studies,

performed in three rodent species and humans, will be
discussed in this review. The expression of the rate-limiting
enzyme required for catecholamine (CA) biosynthesis, tyro-
sine hydroxylase (TH), and the enzyme dopamine beta-
hydroxylase (DBH), which is located within synaptic vesicles
and completes the noradrenaline biosynthesis cascade, or the
identification of their transcripts are considered to be prereq-
uisite histological evidence for a noradrenergic transmitter
phenotype (Ernsberger and Rohrer 1996). The presence of
transcripts for the vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 is
used as a marker during RNA sequencing but is less frequent-
ly referenced during histochemical analyses (Ernsberger et al.
2017). To define the cholinergic transmitter phenotype, tran-
scripts and enzyme immunoreactivity associated with the syn-
thesizing enzyme choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) or the ve-
sicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT) are both regarded
as crucial markers (Weihe et al. 1998; Ernsberger and Rohrer
1999). To characterize the nitrergic transmitter phenotype,
immunoreactivity or transcripts for the neuronal isoform of
NO synthase (NOS) is considered to represent strong evidence
of NO-producing metabolic synthesis capacity (Beesley
1995). A marker used earlier was NADPH activity. These
marker systems are considered to represent valid indicators
of the synthesis and vesicular storage (in the cases of nor-
adrenaline and acetylcholine) or activity-regulated synthesis
(in the case of NO) of the indicated neurotransmitters. Thus,
the terms noradrenergic, cholinergic, and nitrergic in this re-
view will refer to the histological demonstration that the ana-
lyzed neurons can synthesize and release the respective sig-
naling molecules.

A brief overview of small-molecule neurotransmitter
distribution

An instructive panorama of the divergent histological and
neurochemical organization principles associated with differ-
ent neuron types first became apparent with the visualization
of CA using the histofluorescence technique (Falck et al.
1962). Using this technique, the largely CA character of the
superior cervical ganglion (SCG) in rats could be quantitative-
ly analyzed (Yamauchi and Lever 1971). Moreover, the de-
velopmental profile associated with CA properties in sympa-
thetic neurons could be studied (Cochard et al. 1978). In con-
trast to the sympathetic ganglia, which consist of densely
packed CA neurons, the principal neurons in the cranial auto-
nomic ganglia are devoid of CA histofluorescence, as was
observed in the adult rat ciliary ganglion (CIL) (Landis et al.
1987) and the otic (OG) and sphenopalatine ganglia (SPG)
(Leblanc et al. 1987; Leblanc and Landis 1989). The neurons
in these ganglia express cholinergic properties. Unlike the
cervical and trunk sympathetic ganglia and the cranial para-
sympathetic ganglia, the rat pelvic ganglia are composed of
groups of both CA-positive and -negative cell clusters (Dail

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

203

et al. 1975). Their composition as a mixture of noradrenergic,
cholinergic, and nitrergic structures, will be discussed below.
With the availability of antibodies against transmitter-
synthesizing enzymes and neuropeptides, the general under-
standing of autonomic neurochemistry diversity became
greatly advanced. An informative example for several studies
in this field is the work by Ceccatelli et al. (1994), who per-
formed a semiquantitative analysis of the detection of a neu-
rotransmitter synthesizing enzyme and neuropeptide immuno-
reactivity (IR), in several parasympathetic cranial ganglia and
major ganglia of the sympathetic trunk, which uncovered ma-
jor differences in neurotransmitter expression between the
parasympathetic and the sympathetic ANS branches.

The organization of the autonomic ganglia and
plexus along the body axis

The cellular resolution provided by immunohistochemistry
protocols has advanced the current understanding of the cel-
lular components that comprise the autonomic ganglia and
underline the diverse distributions of noradrenergic, compared
with cholinergic, and nitrergic neurons, across the autonomic
ganglia. The dramatic alteration in neurotransmitter and mod-
ulator expression occurs together with changes in the cellular
organization from the cranial parasympathetic to the
paravertebral and prevertebral sympathetic ganglia, and final-
ly to the pelvic ganglia and plexus.

The cranial ganglia of the parasympathetic nervous system
appear as four paired ganglionic structures that are associated
with the cranial nerves: the ciliary (CIL), sphenopalatine
(SPG) (in humans pterygopalatine, PTG), otic (OG), and sub-
mandibular ganglia (SMG) (Gaskell 1886; Fritzsch et al.
2017). An exception pose the dispersed cell clusters of the
choroideal ganglion cells (May et al. 2004). The neurons of
all cranial ganglia are generated from Schwann cell precursor-
like progenitors, distinct from trunk and pelvic autonomic
neurons (Dyachuk et al. 2014; Espinosa-Medina et al. 2014;
Espinosa-Medina et al. 2016).

The paravertebral sympathetic ganglia are integrated into a
macroscopically prominent structure, the sympathetic chain,
which was initially considered to be a nerve and was named
the intercostal nerve (Winslow 1732). This structure is com-
posed of segmentally arranged pairs of ganglia, connected by
commissural strands that are composed of pre- and post-
ganglionic sympathetic nerve fibers. The cranial end of the
sympathetic chain, with the superior cervical ganglion
(SCG) shows a certain degree of lobulation. In the neck re-
gion, a middle cervical ganglion (MCG) is observed in larger
mammals, including humans. The SCG and MCG are con-
nected, via longitudinal fiber trunks, with the thoracic through
sacral paravertebral ganglia.

At the level of the celiac, mesenteric, and renal arteries,
which branch from the aorta, a set of less well-demarcated

and more lobulated ganglia complement the paired sympathet-
ic strands, including the prevertebral celiac, superior, and in-
ferior mesenteric or aorticorenal ganglia belonging to the
preaortic ganglia and plexus. In humans, an additional, less
discrete ganglionic structure was recently described, referred
to as the prehypogastric ganglion (Beveridge et al. 2016;
Furlan et al. 2016). These ganglia are connected with the aor-
tic plexus, which extends into the superior hypogastric plexus,
containing a yet unspecified number of neuronal cells (Kraima
et al. 2015).

The hypogastric nerves form bilaterally out of the superior
hypogastric plexus, which connects them with the aortic plex-
us and the inferior mesenteric ganglia (IMG). These nerves
reach the pelvic ganglia or plexus, which appear more or less
discrete and circumscribed, depending on the mammalian spe-
cies examined (Wozniak and Skowronska 1967). The diverse
histological organization observed among varying mammali-
an species appears to be related to the size of the adult animals.
In small animals, prominent major anterior pelvic ganglia
(APG) develop, linked to the hypogastric nerve, as observed
in rats (Dail et al. 1975; Arellano et al. 2019) and guinea pigs
(Morris and Gibbins 1987), where they are connected, via
fiber tracts, with smaller accessory ganglia. In larger animals,
the system is organized as a plexus consisting of large num-
bers of smaller neuron clusters, linked by axon tracts, as can
be observed in dogs (Li and Masuko 2001) and humans
(Takenaka et al. 2005).

Overall, the organization of the peripheral ANS along the
body axis changes, from relatively well-demarcated but small
and partially lobulated ganglia in the cranial region, to large,
discrete ganglia in the cervical and paravertebral domain, to a
combination of plexuses and macroscopically less well-
demarcated ganglia in the abdominal region. The neurochemi-
cal fingerprints of the neurons located in these ganglia and
plexuses in rats, guinea pigs (when available), and humans will
be discussed here. Comparisons between rats and guinea pigs,
which are the first mammalian model species that were ana-
lyzed by immunohistochemistry, suggested the conservation of
gross organizational features between closely related mamma-
lian species. This conservation extends to differences between
the cholinergic and nitrergic characters of the cranial parasym-
pathetic ganglia and the largely noradrenergic properties of the
paravertebral and prevertebral sympathetic ganglia in the cer-
vical and trunk regions, which reflect the key divide between
parasympathetic and sympathetic features that have been re-
solved in physiological and pharmacological studies.

This comparative anatomical and cell biological approach
can help appreciate and identify altered and new elements of
the system, which can be defined when comparing between
different genders within the same species and when examin-
ing the evolutionary differences that exist between rodents and
humans. The significant expansion of the noradrenergic neu-
ronal population in the human pelvic plexus (PP), compared

204

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

with the rodent major pelvic ganglia (MPG), illustrates one
such alteration in neuron populations. The appearance of di-
vergent neuropeptide combinations between male and female
rodents in the same species supports the existence of sex-
specific differences in neuron populations, which have not
yet been analyzed in humans. In addition, the developmental
data examining the acquisition of these phenotypes, which has
been obtained from studies performed in mice, will also be
considered. These studies focus on the central questions of
how such divergent neuron populations come into existence
and how distinct neurochemical profiles become realized in
the different rostrocaudal domains of the ANS and are gener-
ated from distinct precursor cells.

Cranial autonomic ganglia: cholinergic
and nitrergic neurons, derived from Schwann
cell precursor-like progenitors

Neurochemical features of the principal neurons in
the cranial ganglia of the rat

The availability of antisera against TH, NOS, and ChAT has
facilitated the characterization of neuron classes in the rat cra-
nial ganglia (Table 1) and provided evidence regarding the
putative neurotransmitters used by individual cells. In CIL
and OG, virtually all principal neurons display ChAT immu-
noreactivity, indicating cholinergic metabolism and transmis-
sion (Landis et al. 1987; Leblanc et al. 1987); however,

VAChT was not examined in these studies. In the SPG, con-
siderable variability of ChAT staining was observed, with 25%
of the principal neurons displaying only very weak or no im-
munoreactivity (Leblanc et al. 1987). However, the majority of
neurons in this ganglion (73%) were positive for NOS (Warn
et al. 1997), demonstrating the importance of nitrergic metab-
olism and transmission in these neurons. Similarly, many neu-
rons in the SMG display NOS IR (Ceccatelli et al. 1994).

In addition to these small-molecule neurotransmitter phe-
notypes, the neuropeptides neuropeptide Y (NPY) and vaso-
active intestinal peptide (VIP) constitute important markers
for cranial neurons. NPY is expressed in 60 to 80% of OG
cells, 30% of CIL cells, and 15% of SPG cells in adult rats
(Leblanc et al. 1987; Kuwayama et al. 1988). Virtually all
NPY-positive cells in the OG and the SPG also express VIP
(Leblanc et al. 1987). Many NOS-positive cells in the SPG
and SMG also present NPY and/or VIP IR (Ceccatelli et al.
1994) (compare, however, Csati et al. 2012); however, some
NPY- and VIP-positive cells are NOS-negative. NPY and TH
expression in the SPG appear to occur in different cells
(Kuwayama et al. 1988), whereas the majority of NPY IR
cells in the CIL are TH-positive, and many are also ChAT-
positive (Leblanc et al. 1987).

Unexpectedly, a variable number of TH IR cells have been
observed, with none appearing in the SMG, low numbers in
the OG and SPG, and high numbers in the CIL (25 to 40% of
total cells) (Landis et al. 1987; Leblanc et al. 1987) (Table 1).
Importantly, only 3% of cells were identified as TH/DBH
double-positive, indicating that in the cranial parasympathetic

Table 1

The expression of cholinergic, nitrergic, and noradrenergic transmitter synthesis enzymes in rat and human cranial parasympathetic ganglia

Cholinergic
ChAT

Nitrergic
NOS

Noradrenergic
CA

TH
TH
TH

TH/DBH
TH

DBH

Rat

Rat

Human

rat

Human

CIL
Virt. all

All

CIL

CIL
no

> 30%

25–40%

3%
23%

no

OG

All

OG

75 to 80%

OG
no

< 1%

SPG

PG

< 100%

SPG
majority
40%+++
30%+
70 to 80%

75 to 80%

SPG
no

< 1%
1.8%

SMG

SMG

No

(Landis et al. 1987)

(Leblanc et al. 1987)

(Warn et al. 1997)

(Nozaki et al. 2016)

(Uddman et al. 1999)

(Leblanc et al. 1987)

(Leblanc and Landis 1989)
(Landis et al. 1987)

(Kirch et al. 1995)

The proportion of neurones expressing the cholinergic marker enzyme ChAT, the nitrergic marker enzyme NOS, and the noradrenergic marker enzymes
TH and DBH as detected by immunohistochemistry in rat and human cranial ganglia are provided

CIL, ciliary ganglion; OG, otic ganglion; SPG, sphenopalatine ganglion; SMG, submandibular ganglion; TH/DBH, percentage of TH and DBH double-
positive cells

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

205

neurons of rats, the coordinated induction of the NA biosyn-
thetic pathway only occurs in a small number of cells.

Thus, ChAT and NOS constitute the key small-molecule
neurotransmitter markers in rat cranial parasympathetic gan-
glia, whereas the co-expression of noradrenaline-synthesizing
enzymes is rare. The percentages of NPY- and VIP-positive
neurons differ strongly among ganglia, indicating that they
may be associated with target fields.

The prevalence of NOS-positive cells and the lack of
TH/DBH coexpression observed in human cranial
parasympathetic ganglia are comparable with obser-
vations in rat

In the human ciliary ganglia, approximately 23% of neurons
were TH IR-positive, based on examinations of adult body
donors (Kirch et al. 1995). Similar to observations made in
the rat cranial parasympathetic ganglia, and different from the
observations in the rat and human superior cervical ganglion,
these neurons did not co-express DBH (Table 1), indicating
that they are unable to synthesize noradrenaline. TH-positive
cells can be detected during fetal development, between the
12th and 15th post-conception weeks, at low levels, in the
region of the ciliary and submandibular ganglion (Kiyokawa
et al. 2012; Teshima et al. 2019).

At this early developmental stage, strong NOS IR can be
detected in the developing submandibular gland, in the
area of the developing SMG, whereas the signals in the
area of the SPG and OG were weak to moderate, and the
signals in the developing domain of the CIL were weak or
absent (Kiyokawa et al. 2012). In the SPG and OG of adult
donors, 75 to 80% of neurons were NOS-positive (Uddman
et al. 1999).

VIP IR has also been described during the 12th to 15th fetal
weeks in the SPG, SMG, and CIL, at different intensity levels
and with different patterns, with only a few VIP-positive cells
observed in the region of developing CIL (Kiyokawa et al.
2012). In adult donors, more than 90% of cells were VIP-
positive in the SPG and OG (Motosugi 1993; Uddman et al.
1999), and VIP and NOS IR were reported to colocalize in the
SPG (Csati et al. 2012). In stark difference to the observations
for the SPG, no VIP-positive neurons were described in the
CIL of adult donors (Kirch et al. 1995). Among choroid gan-
glion cells in young and adult donors, 95% were VIP-positive
(May et al. 2004). No NPY-positive cells were detected in the
CIL of elderly donors (Kirch et al. 1995). NPY-positive cho-
roid ganglion cells represented fewer than 5% of total cells,
compared with 95% that were VIP-positive (May et al. 2004).
Similar to the situation observed in rats, the co-expression
of noradrenaline-synthesizing enzymes was not observed in
human cranial parasympathetic ganglia, even though TH
could be detected. Although the systematic analysis of cholin-
ergic markers by IHC is not currently available, the detection

of NOS shows similarities between humans and rats (Table 1).
The limited data on neuropeptide IR in the cranial ganglia
indicate possible differences between species, with NPY be-
ing more abundant in rats than humans.

Embryonic development of the mouse cranial
parasympathetic ganglia

In two milestone studies (Dyachuk et al. 2014; Espinosa-
Medina et al. 2014), the development of the parasympathetic
ganglia was shown to depend on cranial nerves and neural
crest-derived Schwann cell precursors, which are dispersed
along these nerves. These cells are initially derived from
Sox10-positive neural crest cells, which become Sox10/
Phox2b-double positive as the nerve grows. They
also express characteristic neural crest cell markers, such as
FoxD3 or Sox2, and Schwann cell precursors makers, like
ErbB3 and PLP (Dyachuk et al. 2014; Espinosa-Medina
et al. 2014).

The proneural gene Ascl1 must be upregulated to achieve
neuronal differentiation. The mutational inactivation of Ascl1
results in the severe atrophy or lack of newborn cranial para-
sympathetic neurons (Hirsch et al. 1998). Phox2 transcription
factors (TFs) are also necessary. In newborn Phox2a-mutant
animals, the OG and SPG are missing, whereas the SMG is
only partially lost at birth (Morin et al. 1997). These observa-
tions demonstrated the specific effects on the rostral parasym-
pathetic ganglia. Together with Phox2b, which is necessary
for the development of both parasympathetic and sympathetic
postganglionic neurons (Pattyn et al. 1999), Phox2a and Ascl1
are expressed in both parasympathetic and sympathetic neu-
rons (see below).

The expression of Hand2, a TF that is expressed in sympa-
thetic neurons and is required for noradrenergic differentiation
(Lucas et al. 2006; Morikawa et al. 2007; Schmidt et al. 2009),
has also been documented in embryonic cranial parasympa-
thetic neurons. Hand2-positive neurons in the developing
SPG (Stanzel et al. 2016) and SMG (Teshima et al. 2019)
are found in regions where DBH or TH can be detected.
However, the mutational inactivation of Hand2 in already-
differentiated cells does not affect DBH expression, which is
transient and disappears during the advanced embryonic
stages (Stanzel et al. 2016). This lack of effect on DBH ex-
pression in the parasympathetic ganglia is not understood
mechanistically, but aligns with the lack of TH and DBH
co-expression in these neurons.

Hmx2 and 3 are selectively expressed in mouse cranial
parasympathetic ganglia, during embryonic development
(Espinosa-Medina et al. 2016), whereas Hmx1 is expressed
in sympathetic ganglia (Furlan et al. 2013). In addition, sym-
pathetic neurons differ from cranial parasympathetic neurons
by the expression of Hand1 and Gata3. While roles for the
latter two TFs in the development of sympathetic neurones

206

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

have been documented as described below, the importance of
HMX2 and 3 in parasympathetic neurodevelopment and ex-
pression of the transmitter-synthesizing enzymes or neuro-
transmitter phenotype is not resolved.

Cranial parasympathetic neuron summary

Taken together, the data obtained from humans, rats, and mice
demonstrate a relatively complex neurotransmitter and pep-
tide expression pattern, with the cholinergic and nitrergic
transmitter synthesizing enzymes ChAT and NOS, respective-
ly, expressed in most if not all neurons in the parasympathetic
cranial ganglia. The noradrenergic transmitter synthesizing
enzymes TH and DBH can be expressed, transiently, but do
not appear to be co-expressed in a significant number of neu-
rons. Correspondingly, cranial parasympathetic ganglion neu-
rons do not show CA histofluorescence, indicating that no
substantial loading of synaptic vesicles with CA occurs, and
cranial parasympathetic neurons do not secrete noradrenaline
as a neurotransmitter.

Cranial parasympathetic postganglionic neurons in mice
are generated from Schwann cell precursor-like progenitor
cells, which distribute along the nerves to reach their final
destinations. Starting as Sox10-positive neural crest pheno-
types, the cells progress through a Schwann cell precursor-
like Sox-10/Phox2b double-positive state to an Ascl1-
positive state. Although these TFs are also expressed during
the development of sympathetic postganglionic neurons, the
parasympathetic postganglionic lineage does not exhibit the
coordinated expression of noradrenergic biosynthesis en-
zymes. How TFs that are uniquely expressed in parasympa-
thetic progenitor cells, such as Hmx2 and 3, contribute to the
transmitter phenotype requires further investigation.

Paravertebral and prevertebral sympathetic
ganglia: largely noradrenergic neurons,
derived from migrating neural crest
precursors

Transmitter-synthesizing enzyme and neuropeptide
expression patterns in human cervical and stellate
sympathetic ganglia

In the superior cervical ganglia of adult human donor tissues,
virtually all neurons were described as both TH- and DBH-
positive (Baffi et al. 1992; Kirch et al. 1995) (Table 2). These
studies confirmed that in humans, the vast majority of SCG
neurons are noradrenergic. Later studies examining TH IR cell
numbers yielded proportions below 90% (Tajti et al. 1999;
Kokubun et al. 2019). In a detailed IHC analysis of TH and
DBH expression in the superior (SCG), middle cervical

(MCG), and stellate ganglia (STG), DBH was observed in more
than 90% of neurons (Kokubun et al. 2019).

The evaluation of T2 and T3 sympathetic ganglia showed
that 75% of neurons were TH- and DBH-positive (Schalling
et al. 1989), and in the sacral sympathetic ganglia, approximate-
ly 90% of neurons were TH-positive (Takenaka et al. 2005).
This latter study was particularly interesting as it compared the
percentages of TH-positive cells in more caudoventrally located
autonomic neurons. The percentage of TH-positive neurons
changes, from approximately 90% in the sacral sympathetic
ganglia to 58% along the hypogastric nerve, 36% in the pelvic
splanchnic nerves, 46% in pelvic neurovascular bundles, and
58% in the pelvic plexuses with highly variable counts among
individuals. This study nicely illustrates the sharp loss of nor-
adrenergic neuron predominance moving toward the caudal
and ventral positions along the hypogastric nerves.

Systematic studies examining the expression of cholinergic
markers, such as ChAT and VAChT, and the nitrergic marker
NOS are not available in humans. Only a single report exists
describing the lack of NOS IR neurons in the SCG (Tajti et al.
1999), indicating that nitrergic signaling does not play a sig-
nificant role in transmission from sympathetic neurons located
in the paravertebral sympathetic ganglia, which is similar to
the pattern observed in rodents.

Quantitative data analyzing VIP in the human SCG have
provided varying results (Tajti et al. 1999; Kokubun et al.
2019). Using sensitive 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) IHC,
16 and 19% of neurons were found to be VIP-positive in the
SCG and MCG of adult donors, respectively (Kokubun et al.
2019). The co-localization of VIP and calcitonin gene-related
peptide (CGRP) has been reported in the SCG of donors of
various ages (Schmitt et al. 1988; Baffi et al. 1992). VIP and
CGRP are also co-localized in the human STG, which shows a
similar percentage of VIP IR cells (14%) (Schmitt et al. 1988;
Kokubun et al. 2019). Developmental analysis has been per-
formed for VIP in the human STG, which demonstrated a
strong decrease in the proportion of VIP-positive cells from
the neonatal to the adult stages (Roudenok 2000). In the lum-
bar paravertebral sympathetic ganglia, some VIP-positive
cells are detected, all of which were TH-negative (Jarvi et al.
1989), suggesting a cholinergic phenotype.

NPY has been detected in a large number of human SCG
neurons, most of which are TH-positive (Baffi et al. 1992;
Kirch et al. 1995). Quantification revealed that 75% of neu-
rons in the SCG were TH- and NPY-positive (Tajti et al.
1999), 59% and 71% NPY-positive cells in SCG and MCG,
respectively and 87% in STG (Kokubun et al. 2019). One half
of the TH- and DBH-positive cells in T2 and T3 sympathetic
neurons have been described as NPY-positive (Schalling et al.
1989). During development, NPY-positive neurons represent-
ed 7% of the paravertebral ganglia in premature fetuses, from
24 to 27 weeks, and the proportion increased to 41% by 38 to
41 weeks of gestation (Roudenok 2000).

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

Table 2 The expression of
noradrenergic markers in adult
human sympathetic ganglia

207

SCG

MCG

STG

Thoracic

Sacral

TH

83.8%

59.3%

70.4%

> 75%

Virt. all

Rich

91%

Virt. all

Similar to TH

DBH

92.1%

94.2%

75%

75%

(Kokubun et al. 2019)

(Schalling et al. 1989)

(Tajti et al. 1999)

90%

(Takenaka et al. 2005)

(Kirch et al. 1995)

(Baffi et al. 1992)

(Kokubun et al. 2019)

(Schalling et al. 1989)

(Kirch et al. 1995)

(Baffi et al. 1992)

The proportion of neurons immunopositive for the noradrenergic marker enzymes TH and DBH for different
human cervical and paravertebral sympathetic ganglia are provided

SCG, superior cervical ganglion; MCG, middle cervical ganglion; STG, stellate ganglion. Virt. all indicates that
virtually all neurons are positive; rich indicates a rich supply of positive neurons; similar TH indicates that the
number of DBH and TH-positive cells are similar as expected for cells co-expressing the noradrenergic marker
enzymes

The studies have shown that human sympathetic ganglia
are composed of TH- and DBH-positive noradrenergic neu-
rons, which largely co-express the neuropeptide NPY. VIP
expression was found in a small neuron population in the
superior and middle cervical ganglia and at a slightly higher
percentage in the STG. IHC data examining cholinergic and
nitrergic transmitter synthesizing enzymes could not be re-
trieved from the major online literature databases. Similarly,
systematic studies examining the prevertebral sympathetic
ganglia were not available. However, these aspects have been
studied, in detail, in several rodent species.

The predominance of noradrenergic properties, in
combination with changing neuropeptide expression
patterns, in the guinea pig para- and prevertebral
ganglia

A systematic comparison of the two key enzymes associated
with the noradrenaline biosynthesis cascade, TH and DBH,
has been performed in guinea pigs, using IHC-based methods.
These studies demonstrated that the vast majority of neurons
in the SCG (Lundberg et al. 1982), the thoracolumbar
paravertebral ganglia (Gibbins 1992), and the celiac
ganglion/superior mesenteric ganglionic (CEG/SMG) com-
plex (Hokfelt et al. 1977; Lundberg et al. 1982; Lindh et al.
1986) expressed both TH and DBH. A DBH IHC analysis is
not available for the IMG. However, more than 95% of neu-
rons showed TH IR (Sann et al. 1995; Parr and Sharkey 1996),
and CA histofluorescence analysis demonstrated very few
nonfluorescent cells among the vast majority of densely
packed fluorescent cells (Furness and Costa 1973). Taken
together, these studies indicated the existence of a

predominant noradrenergic transmitter phenotype along the
entire rostrocaudal axis of the sympathetic trunk.

This vast dominance of noradrenergic neurons throughout
the paravertebral and prevertebral sympathetic ganglia chang-
es only along the hypogastric nerve, where the neurochemistry
of ganglion-like neuron clusters shifts to a mixed fluorescent
and nonfluorescent character (Furness and Costa 1973). This
feature continues to be retained in the anterior and posterior
pelvic plexuses of autonomic cells. Similarly abrupt changes
are also observed for cholinergic and nitrergic transmitter phe-
notypes, with fewer than 5% of neurons identified as ChAT IR
in the IMG (Elfvin et al. 1993; Sann et al. 1995) and the
detection of only occasional NOS-positive cells (Elfvin et al.
1993; Parr and Sharkey 1996), in contrast with the high pro-
portion of ChAT- and NOS-positive cells in the pelvic ganglia
(see below)

A detailed study examining the small population of ChAT-
expressing neurons was performed in the IMG (Sann et al.
1995). Although 95% of the IMG neurons were TH-positive,
slightly less than 5% of these neurons were ChAT-positive,
with a high degree of mutual exclusion: 94% of TH-negative
cells were ChAT-positive, indicating that almost all neurons
can be grouped into either noradrenergic or cholinergic sub-
populations. The cholinergic neurons were significantly larger
than the noradrenergic neurons, and the majority of ChAT-
positive cells (64%) appeared to be clustered in the caudal
lobe, near the hypogastric nerve. The observation that only
occasional ganglionic neurons were NOS-positive comple-
ments this observation (Elfvin et al. 1993; Sann et al. 1995;
Parr and Sharkey 1996). These NOS IR neurons, which com-
prised 0.9% of the ganglion neurons, were TH- and ChAT-
negative, with smaller cell body sizes than the other cell

208

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

populations (Sann et al. 1995). Thus, the IMG neurons can be
classified into three largely distinct groups: a vast majority of
noradrenergic cells, a minor population of cholinergic cells,
and a minuscule population of nitrergic neurons, which can be
distinguished by neurochemistry and cell body sizes.

Using triple-labeling immunohistofluorescence, the char-
acterization of post-ganglionic sympathetic neuron subpopu-
lations was refined, to analyze the expression patterns of neu-
ropeptides and the synthesizing enzymes required for small-
molecule neurotransmitters (Gibbins 1992). In addition, the
neurochemical features of the synaptic baskets of innervating
pre-ganglionic neurons were explored. By combination with
retrograde labeling from target tissues, neurochemical land-
marks for certain target-selective pathways could also be de-
fined. This type of analysis revealed three populations of post-
ganglionic neurons in the lumbar sympathetic ganglia of the
guinea pig and their putative targets. Staining for TH and NPY
distinguished TH- and NPY-positive neurons from TH-
positive noradrenergic neurons devoid of NPY. In addition,
TH-negative and VIP-positive neurons that co-express NPY
and are presumably cholinergic were also detected (Gibbins
1992). The exclusive association of substance P-positive syn-
aptic baskets with VIP+/NPY+ cells and their retrograde label-
ing from the muscle provided evidence that these neurons can
be classified as skeletal muscle vasodilators. The CGRP-
positive staining of synaptic baskets surrounding TH+/NPY+
cells that were retrogradely labeled from the skeletal muscle
indicated that this population of neurons functions as vasocon-
strictors. Finally, the TH+/NPY− neurons that were retrograde-
ly labeled from hairy skin were regarded as pilomotors
(Gibbins 1992).

Although 46 and 60% of the principal neurons in the tho-
racic and lumbar sympathetic ganglia, respectively, are TH and
NPY double-positive, only 11 and 13%, respectively, were
double-positive for VIP and NPY but lacked TH (Gibbins
1992). In the celiac ganglion, a population of small TH–/
VIP+/NPY+ neurons has also been described (Lindh et al.
1986), which also appear to lack DBH expression (Lundberg
et al. 1982). The size of this population is much smaller than in
the paravertebral ganglia, however, and this population repre-
sents less than 1% of VIP-positive cells. Interestingly, VIP-
positive neurons encompass a small number of larger-sized
neurons that express TH, NPY, and VIP (Lindh et al. 1986).
This observation indicates diversity, even within the small pop-
ulation of VIP-positive neurons, which is further confirmed by
the observation that only 0.2% of the VIP-positive neurons in
the lumbar ganglia are NOS IR (Morris et al. 1998).

The expression patterns of the neuropeptides NPY and so-
matostatin (SOM), which are expressed in noradrenergic sym-
pathetic neurons in the CEG/SMG, appear to be largely but not
completely mutually exclusive (Lundberg et al. 1982; Lindh
et al. 1986). Similar to the situation observed in the
thoracolumbar sympathetic ganglia, NPY expression in

prevertebral ganglia is not restricted to noradrenergic neurons
but can also be detected in the vast majority of the small pop-
ulation of ChAT-positive neurons, as analyzed in the IMG
(Sann et al. 1995). Interestingly, the relative abundance of
NPY- and SOM-positive cells in the CEG/SMG appears to be
opposite that in the IMG (Table 3). Although two thirds of the
neurons in the CEG/SMG express NPY (Lindh et al. 1986;
Sann et al. 1995), only 20 to 25% of neurons were NPY-
positive in the IMG (Sann et al. 1995; Parr and Sharkey
1996). An inverse pattern was observed for SOM expression.
Together with the uneven distribution of SOM within the CEG/
SMG (Hokfelt et al. 1977), these data showed the changing
proportions of neuropeptide-positive cells across the sympa-
thetic ganglia and indicated an important association between
neuropeptide expression, neuronal position, and target innerva-
tion. However, the importance of the neuron-target interaction
for the establishment of neuropeptide expression was only
demonstrated for the neuropeptide VIP, in rat and mouse cho-
linergic sympathetic sudomotor neurons, and for cortistatin ex-
pression, in parasympathetic ciliary neurons (Darland et al.
1995; Darland and Nishi 1998; Nishi et al. 2009).

The distribution and developmental expression of
biosynthetic enzymes for classical neurotransmitters
and neuropeptides in the rat sympathetic ganglia

Similar to the pattern observed in the guinea pig, approximate-
ly 90% of neurons in the rat superior cervical ganglion, stellate
ganglion, and celiac ganglion express TH (Masliukov and
Timmermans 2004; Maslyukov et al. 2010). Although only
occasional ChAT-positive cells are present in the SCG
(Maslyukov et al. 2010), CEG (Maslyukov et al. 2010), and
IMG (Sann et al. 1995), a significant number (up to 5%) of
ChAT-positive neurons can be detected postnatally in the
STG (Morales et al. 1995; Masliukov and Timmermans
2004). TH and ChAT co-expression was either not detected
(Morales et al. 1995) or detected only in a very small percent-
age (less than 1%) of cells (Masliukov and Timmermans
2004). Single NOS-positive neurons in the SCG were only
reported by one group (Ceccatelli et al. 1994), but not by
others (Alm et al. 1995; Masliukov et al. 2014), who also
could not detect them in the STG and CEG.

Particular attention was paid to the expression of the neu-
ropeptides VIP and NPY (Table 4). In postnatal rats, VIP was
detected only occasionally, in the SCG (Masliukov and
Timmermans 2004) and the CEG/SMG (Maslyukov et al.
2010), whereas in the STG, virtually all ChAT-positive neu-
rons co-expressed VIP (Morales et al. 1995). The develop-
mental time course of VIP and ChAT expression in the STG
and the number of VIP-positive neurons are closely associated
(Masliukov and Timmermans 2004). Some VIP-positive STG
neurons also co-express CGRP and SOM, but not NPY
(Morales et al. 1995; Masliukov and Timmermans 2004;

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

Table 3 Neuropeptide expression
in sympathetic ganglia of adult
guinea pigs

209

SCG

Thoracic

Lumbar

CEG/SMG

IMG

VIP

11%

13%

NPY

57%

73%

SOM Single

< 1%

65%

Significant

25%

1 to 2%

(Gibbins 1992)
(Lindh et al. 1986)

(Parr and Sharkey 1996)
(Gibbins 1992)
(Lindh et al. 1986)

App. 20% (Parr and Sharkey 1996)
App. 22% (Sann et al. 1995)

(Lundberg et al. 1982)

(Lindh et al. 1986)

Single

59% in AI, 25% in PS

62.5%

(Hokfelt et al. 1977)

App. 80% (Sann et al. 1995)

App. 80% (Parr and Sharkey 1996)

The proportion of neurones immunopositive for the neuropeptides VIP, NPY and SOM in different sympathetic
ganglia are provided

SCG, superior cervical ganglion; CEG/SMG, celiac ganglion/superior mesenteric ganglia; IMG, inferior mesen-
teric ganglion; AI, anterior–inferior part of the ganglion complex; PS, posterior-superior part of the ganglion
complex; “single” and “significant” refer to only single cells as compared with significant numbers of cells in the
ganglion. “App.” indicates approximate estimates

Masliukov et al. 2012). A small number of VIP-positive cells
that co-express TH has been described (Masliukov and
Timmermans 2004), demonstrating that the expression of
VIP is not entirely restricted to cholinergic cells. VIP-
positive cell bodies in the STG are not NOS-positive, however
(Ceccatelli et al. 1994). Single-cell RNA sequencing data
from the mouse thoracic sympathetic ganglia, however,
disclosed the virtual absence of VIP (as well as SOM and
CGRP) from noradrenergic neurons, compared with NPY,
which is not strictly correlated with any particular small-
molecule neurotransmitter phenotype (Furlan et al. 2016);
see table 1 in Ernsberger and Rohrer (2018).

During the development of the SCG but not the STG, VIP
IR, at different signal intensities, has been detected, starting at
E14.5, in a subset of TH-positive cells (Tyrrell and Landis
1994). At this stage, VIP IR was detected in one third of the
ganglion cells, which reduces to only 2% at birth. In both the
rat SCG and STG, NPY IR was first detected at E 12.5, at
similar signal intensities in almost all TH-positive cells
(Tyrrell and Landis 1994). At birth, approximately 55% of
cells in both ganglia remained NPY-positive. The immunohis-
tochemical results were confirmed by in situ hybridization for
the respective mRNAs, demonstrating the occurrence of early
induction during embryonic development, followed by the

Table 4 Development of VIP and
NPY expression in the rat
sympathetic ganglia

Onset

% at onset

P0

P10

P60

VIP
SCG
STG
NPY
SCG, STG
SCG

STG
CEG

E14.5

App. 30%

E12.5

Almost all

2%
5%

55%
50%

40%
65%

6%

3%

(Tyrrell and Landis 1994)
(Masliukov and Timmermans 2004)

57%

45%
62%

65%

55%
80%

(Tyrrell and Landis 1994)
(Masliukov et al. 2012)

(Masliukov and Timmermans 2004)
(Masliukov et al. 2012)

The proportions of neurons that are immunopositive for the neuropeptides VIP and NPY in rat sympathetic
ganglia at different developmental stages are provided. The expression onset is provided with the embryonic
day (E) of first marker detection and the proportion (%) of positive cells on the day of expression onset. The
proportion of positive cells is also provided for postnatal (P) day 0 to 60 animals

SCG, superior cervical ganglion; SCG, stellate ganglion; CEG, celiac ganglion

210

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

subsequent restriction to specific subpopulations.
I n t e r e s t i n g l y , b o t h p e p t i d e s c a n b e d e t e c t e d i n
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)-labeled precursors and neurons
(Tyrrell and Landis 1994).

The NPY-positive neurons eventually constitute the
largest subpopulation of noradrenergic neurons in the
SCG, STG, and CEG (Jarvi et al. 1986; Tyrrell and
Landis 1994; Hall and MacPhedran 1995; Masliukov
and Timmermans 2004; Maslyukov et al. 2010;
Masliukov et al. 2012). The vast majority of NPY-
positive neurons co-express TH, whereas ChAT-positive
cells are generally NPY-negative (Masliukov et al. 2012).
In the STG, only a few NPY-positive neurons lacked TH
expression, and VIP-positive cells were not found to ex-
press NPY (Masliukov and Timmermans 2004).

target-dependent

The development of the full complement of VIP-
positive neurons in the rat sympathetic ganglia involves
induction of cholinergic
the postnatal,
neurotransmitter properties, including VIP expression in
the sympathetic neurons that
innervate sweat glands
(Landis 1988). In a series of studies, which belong to
the founder tales of developmental neurobiology, cate-
cholaminergic sympathetic fibers were found to inner-
vate sweat glands in the rat footpad during early post-
natal development and transdifferentiate,
losing CA
histofluorescence and acquiring cholinergic properties
(Landis and Keefe 1983). The cholinergic differentiation
process involves the induction of ChAT (Leblanc and
Landis 1986) and VAChT (Guidry and Landis 1998).
The expression of the neuropeptides VIP and CGRP
complements the cholinergic phenotype (Landis and
Fredieu 1986). The shift
in the transmitter phenotype
could be induced by the transplantation of footpad tis-
sues into regions that are normally innervated by norad-
renergic sympathetic neurons (Schotzinger and Landis
1988, 1990), as described by key studies on the “target
determination of neurotransmitter phenotype in sympa-
thetic neurons” (Schotzinger et al. 1994). The blockade
of the corresponding differentiation process,
in vitro,
through the interference of neuropoietic cytokine signal-
ing in neuron/target co-cultures,
indicated that mem-
ber(s) of this family of cytokines could induce target-
dependent cholinergic differentiation (Habecker et al.
1997). Using a conditional knockout of the gp130 cyto-
kine receptor in mouse sympathetic neurons, the essen-
tial role played by neuropoietic cytokines during this
process was demonstrated in vivo (Stanke et al. 2006),
but which of the cytokines expressed in sweat glands is
important remains unclear. Eventually, data from human
genetic disorders identified cytokine receptor-like factor
1 (CRLF1)/cardiotrophin-like cytokine factor 1 (CLCF1)
as cholinergic differentiation factor in human sweat
glands (Di Leo et al. 2010; Melone et al. 2014).

The generation of sympathetic post-ganglionic neu-
rons from migrating neural crest cells: insights from
chick and mouse studies

Dorsoventral migration of thoracolumbar neural crest cells
and the induction of differentiation by aorta-derived bone
morphogenetic proteins Unlike the spread of neural crest-
derived precursors along previously formed nerves, as was
observed in the head during the formation of parasympathetic
ganglia, progenitor cells located at the dorsal crest of the
forming neural tube (Kalcheim 2018), which are recruited
for the formation of sympathetic ganglia, initially undergo
an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and migrate ventrally
through developing somites (Bronner-Fraser 1995; Young
et al. 2004; Kulesa et al. 2009; Kalcheim 2015). Upon arrival
in the vicinity of the aorta, the neural crest-derived precursors
begin to differentiate and express TH and DBH, as detailed in
the chick embryo (Ernsberger et al. 1995; Ernsberger 2000),
indicative of their acquisition of a noradrenergic phenotype.
Under the influence of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 4
and 7, which are expressed in the walls of the aorta, this
differentiation process is triggered concurrently with the ac-
quisition of neuronal properties (Reissmann et al. 1996; Shah
et al. 1996; Schneider et al. 1999; Patzke et al. 2001). During
this event, progenitor and neuroblast cells progress through a
sequence of transcription factor induction steps, as shown in
chick embryos (Ernsberger et al. 1995; Howard et al. 2000;
Tsarovina et al. 2004).

In chick and mouse embryos, cholinergic features can be
detected soon after noradrenergic differentiation, and the co-
expression of both sets of markers can be detected in a signif-
icant number of cells (Ernsberger et al. 1997; Huber and
Ernsberger 2006; Furlan et al. 2013; Huang et al. 2013).
Thus, developing cells are considered to be hybrid cells during
these initial stages (Apostolova and Dechant 2009; Furlan
et al. 2013). Subsequently, these neurons with mixed trans-
mitter phenotypes start to segregate into noradrenergic and
cholinergic neurons. The regulatory processes that underlie
the segregation of these two neurotransmitter phenotypes are
not yet fully understood.

Induction of a transcription factor network for the generation
of the noradrenergic transmitter phenotype The BMP-
induced differentiation, from Sox10-positive neural crest pre-
cursors to sympathetic neuroblasts, is critically dependent on
the TF Phox2b (Pattyn et al. 1999). Phox2b is not only re-
quired to initiate differentiation but is also necessary to main-
tain the expression of noradrenergic characteristics, in partic-
ular TH and DBH expression, in differentiated sympathetic
neurons (Coppola et al. 2010). Another critical TF that is
involved in the development of the noradrenergic phenotype
is Hand2, as demonstrated by the effects of Hand2 mutational
inactivation (Lucas et al. 2006; Morikawa et al. 2007). Despite

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

211

the absence of effects on Gata2/3, Phox2a/b, and Ascl1 ex-
pression, Hand2 regulates TH and DBH expression during
neuronal differentiation. Importantly, it is required for
Hand1 (Morikawa et al. 2005), a TF that is selectively
expressed in sympathetic neurons (Espinosa-Medina et al.
2016; Zeisel et al. 2018). In differentiated neurons, Hand2 is
required for the expression of the noradrenergic phenotype, as
demonstrated in chick sympathetic neurons (Schmidt et al.
2009). Interestingly, in cranial parasympathetic precursors,
where its expression appears to be associated with TH expres-
sion, Hand2 is not sufficient to drive the co-expression of TH
and DBH or initiate full noradrenergic phenotypic differenti-
ation (see above). Gata3 inactivation in mice reduces TH but
not DBH mRNA levels in sympathetic ganglia (Tsarovina
et al. 2004). Whether the combined activities of Phox2a/b,
Hand1/2, Gata2/3, and Ascl1 and their regulation during var-
ious developmental phases are sufficient to explain the induc-
tion and maintenance of the full set of gene products that are
necessary for a bona fide noradrenergic transmitter phenotype
among sympathetic neurons is currently not fully understood.
The role played by Insm2, which is specifically expressed in
mature noradrenergic but not cholinergic sympathetic neurons
(Table 5), also requires further analysis.

In noradrenergic neuroblastoma cell lines, core regulatory
circuits (CRCs) that govern gene expression programs have

Table 5
sympathetic neurons

Expression of selected transcription factors in mouse thoracic

NA1 NA2

NA3

NA4

NA5

Ach1 Ach2

5.3
Phox2b
6.8
Phox2a
0.1
Ascl1
3.3
Hand1
7.6
Hand2
5.8
Gata2
2.8
Gata3
Hmx1
1.6
Hmx 2/3 ND
0.1
Insm1
1.5
Insm2

7.59
5.85
0
4.13
11.87
7.41
3.54
1.33
ND
0.05
2.05

5.97
7.61
0.08
3.48
11.54
6.64
3.35
2.17
ND
0.17
2.01

5.89
6.06
0
2.33
11.78
5.72
5.06
1.22
ND
0
2.56

4.09
5.39
0
3.26
11.87
5.48
4.35
1.17
ND
0.04
1.48

5.25
6.12
0
2
8
2.5
3.12
0.25
ND
0
0

3.38
3.38
0
1.5
7.75
1.38
1.88
0
ND
0
0

The numbers given are mean number of transcripts per cell in the indi-
cated noradrenergic (NA 1–5) and cholinergic (Ach1 and 2) sympathetic
neuron subpopulations as analyzed by single cell RNA sequencing
(Furlan et al. 2016). Whereas no major differences are observed for
Phox2 transcript levels, Hand 1 and 2 transcripts in noradrenergic neurons
in general exceed those in cholinergic neurons in number. Similar differ-
ences are observed for Gata 2 and 3. Whereas HMX1 is detected at least
5-fold higher levels in noradrenergic than cholinergic neurons, HMX 2
and 3 transcripts are not found in any sympathetic neuron population,
neither noradrenergic nor cholinergic. The most striking difference be-
tween noradrenergic and cholinergic neurons is observed for Insm2. Data
derived from Furlan et al. (2016), supplementary table nn 4376-s4

been identified by super-enhancer (SE) mapping. The stron-
gest SEs have been observed at loci associated with the TFs
Hand2, Phox2b, Phox2a, Gata2, and Gata3, which bind to
each other’s SEs and are thought to control noradrenergic
identity through cross-regulatory expression (Boeva et al.
2017; van Groningen et al. 2017). The extent to which SE-
driven CRCs are active in developing sympathetic neurons
remains to be determined.

Cholinergic sympathetic neurons can be generated from ini-
tially hybrid precursors or, later, from noradrenergic sympa-
thetic neurons Cholinergic differentiation in sympathetic neu-
rons can be affected by growth factor signaling during both
embryonic and postnatal development. During chick embry-
onic development, the expression of the cholinergic markers
ChAT and VIP and the co-expression with the glial cell line-
derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)-family growth factor re-
ceptor Ret suggests a role for Ret signaling in the development
of cholinergic sympathetic neurons (Ernsberger et al. 1997).
During embryogenesis in mice, Ret signaling is required for
the normal development of the cholinergic markers ChAT and
VAChT and the formation of a normal complement of cholin-
ergic neurons in the STG and upper thoracic sympathetic gan-
glia (Burau et al. 2004; Furlan et al. 2013).

The early and widespread expression of cholinergic prop-
erties in newly formed mouse sympathetic neurons, at E12.5,
and their co-expression with noradrenergic properties are rap-
idly restricted to a small subset of cells during development
(Burau et al. 2004; Huber and Ernsberger 2006; Furlan et al.
2013; Huang et al. 2013). The TF homeobox protein 1
(HMX1), which is initially expressed in Ret- and tropomyosin
receptor kinase (Trk)C-positive sympathetic precursor cells at
E13.5, becomes exclusive to the noradrenergic lineage of
sympathetic neurons and is strongly associated with TrkA
expression (Furlan et al. 2013). The rapid downregulation of
Ret in HMX1-positive neurons results in the restriction of
HMX1 to vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT)2-posi-
tive noradrenergic cells and the absence from cholinergic neu-
rons, as early as E14.5. The mutational inactivation of HMX1
results in the massive reduction of TrkA-positive cells in the
embryonic sympathetic ganglia and the dramatic reduction of
TH expression, without affecting DBH and VMAT2. In addi-
tion, the downregulation of Ret, SOM, and VIP is suppressed,
whereas ChAT and VAChT are unaffected. HMX1 appears to
be required for the expression of one key noradrenergic mark-
er and the segregation of noradrenergic from cholinergic dif-
ferentiation pathways.

The mutational inactivation of Ret results in the premature
(E14.5) increase in HMX1 and TrkA expression and the near-
complete absence of ChAT, VAChT, VIP, and SOM expres-
sion (Furlan et al. 2013). In addition, a small increase in the
precursor marker TrkC is observed. The repressive effects of
HMX1 on cholinergic properties are mediated by interference

212

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

with T-cell homeobox 3 (TLX3) expression. The TF TLX3 is
expressed in nearly all precursor cells, at E13.5, and becomes
largely mutually exclusive with HMX1 at E15.5 (Furlan et al.
2013). Most TLX3-positive cells are VAChT-positive at
E15.5, although some express TH. At P60, TLX3 and TH
expression are entirely mutually exclusive. In HMX1 mutant
mice, TLX3 fails to become repressed, and TLX3-positive
c e l l s r e t a i n R e t s t a i n i n g ( F u r l a n e t a l . 2 0 1 3 ) .
Correspondingly, the mutational inactivation of TLX3, which
shows similar distribution patterns as those observed for
VAChT and VIP in embryonic and postnatal mice, results in
the loss of VIP and SOM expression at early embryonic stages
(E12.5), in addition to the loss of VAChT at E18.5 (Huang
et al. 2013). In addition, the mutational inactivation of TLX3
resulted in the loss of high-level Ret expression. In contrast, in
Ret mutant mice, VIP and SOM expression were unaffected at
E12.5 but were abolished at E18.5.

These results demonstrated the critical role played by Ret
signaling in the segregation of noradrenergic and cholinergic
transmitter properties and the embryonic development of cho-
linergic sympathetic neurons. In addition, the later upregula-
tion of Ret expression in noradrenergic neurons may play a
role during the advanced stages of target innervation in certain
tissues (Furlan et al. 2016). The mechanisms underlying this
regulation have not yet been resolved.

In contrast with the embryonic regulation of cholinergic
differentiation in sympathetic neurons, glycoprotein 130
(gp130) signaling induced by neurokine growth factors is es-
sential for the postnatal induction of cholinergic properties in
previously noradrenergic neurons that innervate mammalian
sweat glands, as demonstrated by gp130 mutational inactiva-
tion in mice (Stanke et al. 2006) and by receptor blockade in
cultures of rat sympathetic neurons (Habecker et al. 1997).
Several members of the family of neuropoietic cytokines are
expressed in developing sweat glands (Stanke et al. 2006).
The mutational inactivation of CRLF1 and leukemia inhibito-
ry factor receptor (LIFRβ) in human genetic diseases identi-
fied CRLF1/CLCF1 to be essential for cholinergic differenti-
ation of sweat gland innervation (Di Leo et al. 2010; Melone
et al. 2014). In contrast, the early, embryonic expression of the
cholinergic markers VAChT and the neuropeptide VIP was
not affected by interference with the respective receptor sub-
units LIFR beta or CNTFR alpha interacting with gp130 in
mice (Stanke et al. 2000).

Summarizing key aspects of sympathetic neuron subpopula-
tions, their development, and comparisons with cranial para-
sympathetic post-ganglionic neurons Sympathetic ganglia are
largely dominated by the presence of noradrenergic neurons.
As demonstrated by RNA sequencing, sympathetic neurons in
mouse thoracic ganglia samples express several genes that are
required for the noradrenergic phenotype in a correlated man-
ner, indicating the common regulation of associated gene

transcription (Ernsberger et al. 2017). Studies in chick embry-
os have demonstrated highly correlated gene induction during
the differentiation from the neural crest precursors to sympa-
thetic neurons, which is regulated by a common set of TFs
(Ernsberger 2000). Studies in mice have partially unraveled
the network of TFs involved in this response (Rohrer 2011)
(Fig. 1). The coordinated induction of genes contributing to
the noradrenergic transmitter phenotype was not observed in
cranial parasympathetic neurons. Instead, only incomplete
noradrenergic phenotypes, such as TH-expressing cells de-
void of DBH, can be observed in the cranial parasympathetic
ganglia. A similar differentiation path and neuronal phenotype
are rarely observed in the sympathetic ganglia. Occasionally,
however, DBH-expressing cells devoid of TH are detected, as
was described, in detail, for chick embryos (Ernsberger 2000).
Although the molecular mechanism that drives the segre-
gation of noradrenergic and cholinergic properties in sympa-
thetic neurons is partly understood, the regulation of the cho-
linergic gene locus in cranial parasympathetic neurons re-
mains largely unresolved, which is also the case for the regu-
lation of NOS expression. In particular, the importance of TFs
that are expressed specifically in parasympathetic neurons,
such as HMX2 and 3, remains unclear. For HMX1, which is
specifically expressed in sympathetic neurons, a critical role in
the segregation of noradrenergic and cholinergic properties
has been documented, indicating its necessity for TH and
TrkA expression (Furlan et al. 2013).

Mammalian pelvic ganglia and plexus

Rat pelvic ganglia and the innervation of pelvic
organs: noradrenergic and cholinergic/nitrergic neu-
rons with different neuropeptide expression patterns
in male and female animals

The pelvic plexus of the male rat includes a large ganglion that
is adherent to the lateral lobe of the prostate and receives input
from the hypogastric and pelvic nerves. This ganglion
encompasses many smaller ganglia that are related to the finer
branches of the hypogastric and pelvic nerves (Dail et al.
1975). The large ganglion is referred to as the pelvic ganglion,
the “major pelvic ganglion” (MPG) or “anterior pelvic gangli-
on” (APG) and is generally referred to in studies of male rats.
TH IR cells and CA histofluorescent cells are clustered in
the MPG and can easily be distinguished from non-CA gan-
glion cell clusters (Dail et al. 1975; Arellano et al. 2019).
Overall, the abundance of TH-positive cells is low
(Warburton and Santer 1993; Ceccatelli et al. 1994; Persson
et al. 1998). Quantitative analysis performed in the rat MPG,
in combination with neuropeptide analysis, demonstrated that
all TH-positive neurons co-express NPY (Keast 1991) and

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

213

Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of the gene regulatory network controlling
sympathetic neuron differentiation. Arrows indicate target gene
expression, proliferation, or survival affected by transcription factor
knockout. Initial development is only affected by Phox2b, Hand2, and
Gata2/3. References for individual TFs: Phox2b (Pattyn et al. 1999);

Ascl1 (Pattyn et al. 2006); Hand2 (Lucas et al. 2006; Hendershot et al.
2008; Schmidt et al. 2009); Gata2/3 (Lim et al. 2000; Tsarovina et al.
2004; Tsarovina et al. 2010); Insm1 (Wildner et al. 2008); Sox4/Sox11
(Potzner et al. 2010); Isl1 (Huber et al. 2013); Hmx1 (Furlan et al. 2013);
Tlx3 (Furlan et al. 2013; Huang et al. 2013)

26.3% of nerve cells in the male rat MPG are TH- and NPY-
positive (Keast 1995a) (Table 6).

A small number of TH-positive neurons was observed in
the female rat paracervical ganglia (PCG) (Papka et al. 1987;
Houdeau et al. 1995). In addition, small, intensively fluores-
cent cells are present, which become distinguishable from
neurons after birth, based on size (Sullivan et al. 1994). In
female rats, the nerve cell bodies that innervate pelvic organs
are located in the PCG, which constitutes the major ganglion
of the female PP, and in smaller ganglia, referred to as acces-
sory ganglia (AG), and the ganglia of the hypogastric plexus
(HP)(Houdeau et al. 1995). The proportion of TH-positive
neurons differs among these ganglion complexes with 19%
in PCG, 20% in AG, and 12% in HN (Table 6).

ChAT-positive cells comprise the majority of neurons in
both the male (Keast 1995a) and female (Persson et al. 1998)
MPG. TH and ChAT expression are largely mutually exclu-
sive. ChAT-positive cells prevail near or within the penile
nerve but are uncommon near the entrance of the hypogastric
nerve, where most of the TH-positive cells are found (Keast
1995a). Only 0.5% of the TH-positive cells co-express ChAT,
and only 1 to 2% of cells in the MPG express neither TH nor
ChAT, indicating that > 98% of the MPG neurons are either
noradrenergic or cholinergic (Keast 1995a; Keast et al. 1995).
Interestingly, the densities of varicose nerve endings that

surround ChAT- and TH-positive somata differ, suggesting
that the two neuron populations not only differ in their neuro-
chemistry but also their presynaptic inputs.

Two critical sets of experiments complement these data.
The effects of lesioning the hypogastric or pelvic nerves on
the innervation of various neuron populations were analyzed
in the male rat MPG (Keast 1995b). Lesions in the hypogastric
nerve resulted in the loss of innervation for the majority of
TH-positive neurons, whereas lesions of the pelvic nerves did
not alter the innervation of TH IR somata. Thus, TH-negative
and TH-positive neurons differ in the origin of their pregan-
glionic neurons. In another series of experiments, retrograde
labeling from the bladder, colon, and penis in male rats dem-
onstrated the highly divergent projection of the different neu-
ron populations in the MPG and AG (Keast and De Groat
1992), as 25 to 30% of neurons labeled from the bladder and
colon, but none labeled from the penis, were TH-positive.
Neurons labeled from the prostate revealed two populations,
74% of which were TH-positive neurons of large size, and
16% were VAChT-positive cells of small-diameter
(Nadelhaft 2003). Retrograde labeling studies performed in
the female rat PCG demonstrated that 82% of cells labeled
from the urinary bladder were NF200-positive, 22% were
NOS-positive, and less than 2% were TH-positive (Forrest
et al. 2014). In male rats, the vast majority of neurons (80%

214

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

Table 6

Expression of the neurotransmitter synthesizing enzymes TH, DBH, CHAT, and NOS in male and female rodent pelvic neurons

(A) Male rodent pelvic ganglia
Male MPG/APG TH+
Rat MPG

≈ 33%

GP APG

GP APG

Mus MPG

26%TH+/NPY+
22%
Minority, all NOS−,

few DBH−

34/31%

21%

(B) Female rodent pelvic ganglia
Female
Rat PCG

TH
9%

TH+/ChAT+
0.5%

TH−/ChAT−
1 to 2%

ChAT+
2/3

NOS+

(Keast et al. 1995)

(Keast 1995)
(Song et al. 1994)

No

< 1%

< 5%

Many,

Majority, many

(Elfvin et al. 1997)

all NOS+

CHAT+, some DBH+

47.1%

ChAT

NOS

(Wanigasekara et al. 2003)

(Yan and Keast 2008)

(Houdeau et al. 1995)

Rat AG
Rat HP
Rat MPG

GP PCG

20.4%
12.7%
Minority, all ChAT−

TH
6–9%
all DBH+

DDC
≈ 10%
TH/DBH+

DBH
57 to 73%,

many TH−

Majority,
all TH−

Many, all ChAT+

(Persson et al. 1998)

(Morris and Gibbins 1987)

MPG, major pelvic ganglion; APG, male anterior pelvic ganglion; PCG, female paracervical ganglia; AG, female accessory ganglia; HP, female
hypogastric plexus

Proportions of immunopositive cells for the indicated neurotransmitter phenotype markers in rat, guinea pig (GP), and mouse (Mus) pelvic ganglia.
Mouse data are obtained for two different mouse strains (see text) and, when the mean numbers between the two strains differ in a notable way, are
separated by /. Marker A+ indicates the proportion of cells positive for this marker. Marker A+/marker B+ indicates the proportion of marker B-positive
cells double-positive for both markers. Marker A−/marker B− indicates the proportion of cells negative for both markers. The labels “all,” “many,” and
“some” in combination with “B−/+” in a column A indicate the proportion of cells positive for the marker A (indicated at the top of the column) that are
negative or positive for the marker B. The labels “no,” “minority,” “many,” and “majority” indicate the proportion of cells positive for the respective
marker indicated at the top of the column

to 90%), labeled from penile tissues, were positive for
NADPH and NOS (Schirar et al. 1994; Ding et al. 1995;
Schirar et al. 1997; Tamura et al. 1997), indicating the impor-
tance of nitrergic neurons in the pelvic ganglia.

NOS expression in the pelvic ganglion, which was ob-
served in a large number of neurons, is restricted to choliner-
gic neurons that co-express VIP but lack TH and NPY (Alm
et al. 1995; Persson et al. 1998). Thus, nitrergic neurons in the
rat pelvic ganglia constitute a large subpopulation of cholin-
ergic neurons.

In the male rat MPG, VIP expression, which was detected in
44% of neurons, is restricted to cholinergic neurons, located
mostly near or in the penile nerve and virtually devoid of
NPY (Keast 1991, 1995a; Persson et al. 1998). Interestingly,
the vast majority of penis-innervating MPG neurons are VIP-
and NOS-positive, whereas retrograde labeling from the blad-
der and colon revealed that only 5% to 10% of cells were VIP-
positive (Keast and de Groat 1989; Ding et al. 1995). Double-
labeling confirmed that the vast majority of rat MPG neurons
that innervate the penis are VIP- and NOS-positive (Ding et al.
1995). A similar percentage of VIP-positive neurons (46%) can
be observed in the female rat PCG; however, 90% of cells in the

AG and HP are VIP-positive (Houdeau et al. 1997). Retrograde
tracing shows that > 95% of the neurons that project to the
myometrium in the lower region of the uterus and cervix are
VIP-positive. Importantly, more than 90% of the VIP-positive
cells in the female rat PP are NPY-positive, indicating that the
uterus is innervated by VIP- and NPY-positive cholinergic neu-
rons. Thus, this subpopulation of VIP/NPY double-positive
neurons observed in female animals represents a gender-
specific neuropeptide phenotype (Table 7).

A total of 66% of cells in the male rat MPG are NPY-
positive, most of which are TH-negative (Keast 1991;
Warburton and Santer 1993; Keast 1995a). In contrast with
VIP-positive neurons, NPY-positive neurons are associated
with the innervation of the bladder and colon (50% of retro-
gradely labeled cells were NPY-positive), rather than with
penis innervation (5–7% of cells labeled)(Keast and de
Groat 1989).

In the female rat PCG, 84% of cells were NPY-positive
cells, in addition to 89% of cells in the AG and 94% of cells
in the HP. VIP and NPY were co-expressed in more than 90%
of VIP-positive cells, unlike in male rats (Houdeau et al. 1997)
(Table 7).

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

215

Table 7
neurotransmitter-synthesizing enzymes

Expression of the neuropeptides VIP and NPY in pelvic ganglia of different rodent species, strains, and sexes and the correlation with

(A) Proportions of immunopositive cells for the indicated neuropeptides in rat, guinea pig (GP), and mouse (Mus) pelvic ganglia are provided. Data for

mouse are obtained for two different mouse strains (QS, C57). Numbers are given for VIP and NPY-positive cells as well as for VIP/NPY
double-positive cells (VIP+NPY+)

Ganglion

VIP+

NPY+

VIP+NPY+

Male

Rat
Mus QS

Mus C57
Female
Rat

GP

MPG
MPG

MPG

PCG

AG
HP
PCG
PCG

44%
55%

43%

46%

66%
93%

67%

84%

91%
89%
62 to 65%

89%
94%
72 to 84%

3.7%
50%

24%

some

81%

61%
60%

(Keast 1995a)
(Wanigasekara et al. 2003)

(Houdeau et al. 1997)

(Morris and Gibbins 1987)
(Anderson et al. 1997)

(B) The proportion of VIP and NPY-positive cells among ChAT-positive and -negative as well as NOS-positive cells is provided. The terms “all,”

“almost all,” “many,” and “frequently” indicate the size of the respective subpopulation unless given as precise percentages

Male rat
Male GP

Fem. rat

Ganglion
MPG
APG

MPG

fem. GP

PCG

ChAT+/VIP
Almost all

ChAT−/VIP
3.5%

NOS+/VIP

NOS+/NPY

Many

Frequently

All

97%

almost all

97%

(Keast 1995a)
(Elfvin et al. 1997)

(Persson et al. 1998)

(Alm et al. 1995)

(Anderson et al. 1997)

MPG, male major pelvic ganglion; PCG, female paracervical ganglion; AG, female accessories ganglia; HP, female hypogastric plexus

MPG, male or female major pelvic ganglion; APG, male anterior pelvic ganglion; PCG, female paracervical ganglia

Taken together, these data suggest that the pelvic ganglia in
the rat are composed primarily of cholinergic neurons, which
also, to a large extent, demonstrate nitrergic properties. The
small population of noradrenergic neurons appears to differ in
prevalence between male and female animals and they do not
show the co-expression of nitrergic features. In male and fe-
male animals, the neuropeptide VIP appears to be restricted to
cholinergic/nitrergic cells. The neuropeptide NPY is co-
expressed with TH but is not restricted to noradrenergic neu-
rons. In particular, the female AG displays a large number of
ChAT/VIP/NPY-positive neurons, which appear to represent
a gender-specific neuron population. Target-specific charac-
teristics were also observed, with cholinergic, nitrergic, and
VIP-positive cells innervating the penis rather than the bladder
and colon.

The guinea pig pelvic ganglia: determining
differences in TH and DBH expression

The distribution of CA histofluorescence observed among
pelvic autonomic neurons revealed a mixture of fluorescent
and non-fluorescent ganglia, starting within the hypogastric
nerve (HN) and extending into groups of fluorescent and
non-fluorescent cells, in the anterior (APP) and posterior

(PPP) pelvic plexus of adult guinea pigs (Furness and Costa
1973). The quantification of the paracervical ganglia in adult
female guinea pigs showed that, on average, 6% of the neu-
rons in the ganglia (2% to 18% in different ganglia) displayed
CA histofluorescence (Morris and Gibbins 1987).
Correspondingly, cells expressing TH and dopa decarboxyl-
ase (DDC), which are enzymes in the noradrenaline biosyn-
thesis cascade that precede DBH, represent 6 to 10% of cells.
An increased number of TH-positive cells is observed in the
adult male pelvic ganglia (Song et al. 1994) (Table 6). TH and
NOS expression are mutually exclusive (Elfvin et al. 1993),
with TH-positive cells occurring preferentially in the anterior
part of the ganglion, whereas NOS-positive cells are primarily
located in the caudal region (Elfvin et al. 1997).

Although TH-expressing neurons are also DBH-posi-
tive, supporting their noradrenergic phenotypes, many
that do not express TH
DBH-positive cells exist
(Dhami and Mitchell 1991; Elfvin et al. 1993; Morris
et al. 1997). Indeed,
the majority of neurons in the
female PCG (57 to 73%) express DBH and NOS but
are TH-negative (Morris and Gibbins 1987; Dhami and
Mitchell 1991; Elfvin et al. 1993) (Table 6). Less than
1% of TH-positive cells in guinea pig co-express VIP
(Song et al. 1994).

216

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

Nitrergic neurons that co-express ChAT represent a sub-
stantial number of neurons in the male pelvic ganglion
(Elfvin et al. 1997). NOS was frequently found to be co-
expressed with VIP and NPY, with some neurons contain-
ing both (Song et al. 1994; Elfvin et al. 1997). Groups of
NOS-positive cells were also positive for SOM, and some
co-expressed CGRP. The co-expression of TH and VIP has
not been reported; however, the majority of TH-positive
cells are also NPY-positive.

In the female PCG, VIP is co-expressed with ChAT and
NOS (97%), but not with TH (Morris and Gibbins 1987; Song
et al. 1994; Anderson et al. 1997) (Table 7). NPY is expressed
in the majority of female PCG neurons (approximately 80%),
and more than half of these co-express VIP (Morris and
Gibbins 1987). Thus, similar to the situation observed in the
rat, a significant number of female pelvic neurons co-express
the neuropeptides VIP and NPY.

A detailed analysis of the expression of the neuro-
peptides VIP, NPY, and SOM and the transmitter-
synthesizing enzymes TH, ChAT, and NOS was used
to define 11 classes of neurons in the female PCG, with
fewer than 10% of these being classified as noradrener-
gic neurons (Morris and Gibbins 1987). In combination
with the IHC properties of the terminal synaptic baskets,
which surround the characterized neuron classes, specif-
ic connections could be demonstrated. Almost all nor-
adrenergic neurons appear to be surrounded by NPY-
positive terminals (Morris and Gibbins 1987). In con-
trast, most of DBH/NPY/VIP-positive cell bodies are
surrounded by baskets of substance P-positive nerve fi-
bers. Dense baskets of enkephalin (ENK)-positive termi-
nals surround cell bodies containing SOM alone, indi-
cating that each of these relatively small (generally less
than 10% of ganglion cells) subpopulations is wired to
a specific circuit, from pre-ganglionic to post-ganglionic
neurons. Using the same approach, a connectivity pat-
tern for male guinea pig APP neuron classes has been
established (Dhami and Mitchell 1991).

Taken together, the studies performed on the guinea
pig pelvic ganglia confirmed the small size of the norad-
renergic neuron population, with a difference observed
between the sexes, as described in rats. In addition, these
studies demonstrated the uncoupling between TH and
DBH expression. Unlike the cranial parasympathetic gan-
glia, in which TH and DBH are not co-expressed, in the
rodent pelvic ganglia, the number of DBH-positive cells
largely outnumbered TH-positive cells. The non-
noradrenergic cells mostly showed the co-expression of
cholinergic and nitrergic features, with a negligible per-
centage of neurons that were non-noradrenergic/non-cho-
linergic or of a mixed phenotype. Similar to rats, a large
population of neurons that co-express the neuropeptides
VIP and NPY were found in female animals.

The autonomic neurons of the human pelvic plexus:
an enlarged noradrenergic subpopulation and
developmentally regulated NOS co-expression, in
both noradrenergic and cholinergic neurons

In intra-pelvic soft tissue preparations, obtained from adult
body donors, pelvic ganglion cells were found surrounding
nerve bundles, in enlargements of nerve bundles, in round or
oval ganglia, surrounded by a connective tissue capsule, and
within the structures of numerous intermediate morphologies
(Takenaka et al. 2005). The strict definition of a ganglion
proved to be difficult, and the term “ganglion cell cluster”
was preferred (Takenaka et al. 2005; Muraoka et al. 2018).
Along the pelvic splanchnic nerves, ganglion cells could be
found, and also the hypogastric nerve contained ganglion cell
clusters, including a large ganglion along its distal course.
Unlike in rodents, where the pelvic ganglion cells are found
preferentially in the major pelvic ganglia, human pelvic gan-
glion cells are distributed over a larger area and in various
locations. Similar to experimental rodents, however, the prev-
alence of TH-positive cells changes dramatically, from an
average of 90% of cells in the sacral sympathetic ganglia to
58% in the HN and PP, and 36% in the pelvic splanchnic
nerves (Takenaka et al. 2005).

Overall, more than half of the neurons in the human PP
appeared to be TH-positive (Takenaka et al. 2005; Imai et al.
2006) (Table 8). Adjacent to the bladder neck, the proportion
of TH-positive neurons was reduced (45%) compared with
that near the prostate (67%), in male postnatal donors between
2 and 12 months of age (Jen et al. 1996a). Importantly, all TH-
expressing cells were DBH-positive, indicating a noradrener-
gic transmitter phenotype. VAChT-positive cells in male in-
fants, from 2 months to 3 years of age (Dixon et al. 1997
2000), represented approximately 40% of all neurons.
Comparable with rodents, the vast majority of neurons ap-
peared to be either noradrenergic or cholinergic but not mixed.
In the pelvic ganglia close to the bladder neck and prostate of
male neonates and children, only 8% of the cells co-expressed
the noradrenergic marker TH and the cholinergic marker
VAChT (Dixon et al. 1999).

In agreement with the segregation of noradrenergic and
cholinergic markers in plexus neurons, TH and VAChT IR
was detected in separate nerve fibers in two important male
pelvic target tissues, the corpus cavernosum and corpus
spongiosum (Hedlund et al. 2000). This segregation corre-
sponds with the segregation between TH- and NOS-positive
cells, and the co-expression of VAChT, NOS, and VIP in
fibers and terminals innervating these target tissues. In nerve
fibers that innervate the vas deferens, examined in 28- to 83-
year-old males, TH and DBH are co-expressed with NPY, but
lack VAChT (Jen et al. 1999). Remarkably, during childhood
stages, fibers that innervate the seminal vesicles and vas
deferens may show NOS expression in both TH-positive and

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

217

Table 8

Expression of neurotransmitter-synthesizing enzymes and neuropeptides in the neurones of the human pelvic plexus

(A) The proportions of cells immunopositive for TH, VAChT, both markers (TH/VAChT), or NOS. Numbers are listed according to age for adults (39 to

85 years) as well as neonates, infants, and children (2 months to 7 years)

Donor age
72–85 years

Mean 79 years
64–82 years
39–77 years
7 weeks–6 years
6 months–7 years

2 to 12 months

Site
PP

PP

PP

PP DD SV
PP, male

PP, male

AB

AP

TH
58%

> 50%

45%

67%

TH/VAChT

VAChT

NOS

(Takenaka et al. 2005)

(Imai et al. 2006)

> than TH

(Muraoka et al. 2018)

Variable

(Grozdanovic and Goessl 1999)
(Dixon et al. 1999)

40%

65%

(Dixon et al. 2000)

(Jen et al. 1997)

8%

(B) The proportion of TH-positive, TH-negative, and VAChT-positive cells (co)expressing NOS in human pelvic plexus ganglia of infants and children

AB

AP
PP

NOS/TH+
61%

38%

NOS/TH −
77%

59%

NOS/VAChT+

65%

(Jen et al. 1996a)

(Dixon et al. 2000)

(C) The expression of NPY and VIP in TH-positive and -negative as well as VAChT-positive human pelvic plexus neurones in infants and children

NPY

NPY/VAChT

AB

AP
PP

85%

Almost all

VIP/TH+
64%

42%

VIP/TH−
83%

82%

NPY/TH+
66%

NPY/TH−
92%

62%

65%

(Jen et al. 1996a)

(Dixon et al. 2000)

PP, pelvic plexus; PP DD SV, pelvic plexus ganglion cell clusters near ductus deferens and seminal vesicles; AB, extramural ganglia adjacent to the
bladder; AP, extramural ganglia adjacent to the prostate

> than TH: the proportion of NOS-positive cells exceeds that of TH-positive cells; variable: highly divergent proportions of NOS-positive cells

AB, adjacent to bladder; AP, adjacent to prostate gland; PP, pelvic plexus
The majority of TH-positive as well as TH-negative neurons in infants and children pelvic plexus ganglia express NPY and VIP. “Almost all” VAChT-
positive neurons express NPY. The situation in adults and the comparison between males and females could not be retrieved from PubMed

TH-negative fibers (Jen et al. 1997). These data indicated that
pelvic nerve fibers and neurons in the PP ganglia in humans
may show NOS expression in both noradrenergic and cholin-
ergic units, possibly regulating this co-expression during
development.

Reportedly, in the pelvic ganglion cell clusters of adult
human donors, NOS-positive neurons have been consistently
observed at higher abundance than TH-positive cells
(Muraoka et al. 2018). TH-positive neurons were found to
not express NOS and VIP. Approximately 20% of cells in
the adult human PP ganglia, near the junction of the vas
deferens and seminal vesicle, were reported as NOS-positive,
suggesting that different proportions of NOS-positive cells
may be found in different plexus regions (Grozdanovic and
Goessl 1999).

As indicated previously, age-dependent changes in expres-
sion must also be considered. The quantification of pelvic
tissues obtained from childhood stages (6 months to 7 years)
showed that 65% of neurons were NOS-positive (Dixon et al.
2000) (Table 8). In tissue derived from male infants and chil-
dren, TH and NOS are abundantly co-expressed in fibers that
innervate diverse targets, such as the vas deferens, seminal

vesicles, the prostate, and the bladder neck (Jen et al.
1996b). Ganglia adjacent to the bladder neck included 61%
of neurons that were TH/NOS double-positive, whereas this
proportion in ganglia adjacent to the prostate was 38% (Jen
et al. 1996a). Of the approximately 40% of cells in the pelvic
ganglia that were VAChT-positive in male infants, 65%
coexpressed NOS (Dixon et al. 1997, 2000). TH/NOS-
positive fibers in infants and children can be found in the
bladder neck, ureter, and prostate, and the vas deferens and
seminal vesicles are supplied by a dense TH/NOS-double-
positive fiber net (Jen et al. 1996b). Most remarkably, the
coexistence of TH with NOS (and VIP) becomes lost in
adults, as observed for the vas deferens (Jen et al. 1999).
The moderate innervation in adults by NOS-, VIP-, and
VAChT-positive neurons, rather than TH-positive neurons,
requires a currently unknown cellular transdifferentiation or
reorganization mechanism for pelvic organ innervation and/or
cell type re-specification.

In pelvic ganglion cell clusters from adult human donors,
the co-expression of NOS with VIP can be detected (Muraoka
et al. 2018). In infants and children, a large extent of co-
expression between VIP has been reported for both NOS

218

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

and TH (Jen et al. 1996a) (Table 8). In the ganglia adjacent to
the bladder neck of male infants and children, 64% of the TH-
positive cells (and 83% of the TH-negative cells) co-express
VIP, as do 42% of TH-positive cells (vs. 82% of TH-negative
cells) in the ganglia adjacent to the prostate (Table 8). For
adult penile innervation, 50% of the perivascular nerve fibers
in the corpus cavernosum and spongiosum and 90% of the
trabecular nerve fibers are NOS- and VIP-positive (Ehmke
et al. 1995). In the fibers of the corpus cavernosum and corpus
spongiosum, VIP IR has been associated with VAChT expres-
sion, in addition to NOS expression, but not with TH expres-
sion (Hedlund et al. 2000).

Approximately 85% of the neurons in the pelvic ganglia
proximal to the bladder and prostate in male neonates and
infants express the neuropeptide NPY (Dixon et al. 2000)
(Table 8). The co-expression of TH and NPY can be detected
in 66 and 62% of the cells in the ganglia adjacent to the
bladder neck and the prostate, respectively (Jen et al.
1996a). Similar to rodents, the expression of NPY in human
pelvic neurons is not restricted to noradrenergic neurons, as 92
and 65% of TH-negative cells co-express NPY in the ganglia
adjacent to the bladder neck and the prostate, respectively
(Table 8). Of the approximately 40% of cells in the pelvic
ganglion of male infants that are VAChT-positive, almost all
of them co-express NPY (Dixon et al. 1997, 2000). In a study
that compared the expression of diverse neuropeptides, in-
cluding NPY and VIP, in the nerves that innervate the penis
in 21- to 34-year-old male donors (Hauser-Kronberger et al.
1994), a qualitatively similar distribution of these two peptides
was observed among blood vessels, sinusoids, and trabeculae
in the cavernous and spongious bodies, glans, and urethra.
NOS-positive cells that co-express NPY and TH can be ob-
served in the vas deference and seminal vesicles, in children
(Jen et al. 1997).

When comparing the distribution of neurotransmitter phe-
notypes among pelvic neurons, key differences between
humans and rodents have become apparent, raising several
questions. One such quantitative difference in neuronal sub-
population compositions concerns the proportion of noradren-
ergic neurons in the human PP (more than 50%), which sig-
nificantly exceeds that in the rodent pelvic ganglia (10 to 30%,
depending on sex). Whether the gender-specific differences in
peptide expression patterns that have been observed in rodents
also exist in humans remains to be seen. Finally, changing co-
expression patterns, in terms of the noradrenergic and nitrergic
properties, which have been observed in human target tissues,
also raises a wide range of highly relevant questions. Is such a
shift also observed in rodents and can it be mechanistically
explored in experimental animals? Does this shift occur due to
changes in gene expression patterns in individual cells or due
to the maturation of fiber connections, in possible combina-
tion with the expansion or restriction of defined neuron sub-
populations? How does this shift contribute to changes in the

activity patterns of pelvic organs during aging or disease and
can this be modulated therapeutically?

Neurotransmitter phenotypes observed in intramural
ganglia of the mammalian bladder

The histology and function of intramural ganglia in the blad-
der were investigated in the guinea pig. In newborn animals,
numerous intramural ganglia were detected, lying among
smooth muscle bundles and in the submucosa (James and
Burnstock 1988). The small number of neurons that expressed
DBH (1 to 6%) and the scarcity of TH-positive cells indicated
that the noradrenergic neuron population in the guinea pig
intramural ganglia is likely of little importance (James and
Burnstock 1988; Smet et al. 1996b; Werkstrom et al. 1998).
Instead, NADPH-reactive and NOS-positive neurons were
abundant, distinct from TH-positive cells, indicating the im-
portance of nitrergic signaling (Saffrey et al. 1994; Smet et al.
1994). Different studies have reported that between 50 and
70% of cells in the intramural ganglia are NOS-positive
(Smet et al. 1996b; Werkstrom et al. 1998; Zhou and Ling
1998). NPY can also be detected in each of these ganglia, in
70 to 85% of the neurons (James and Burnstock 1988). The
prevalence of this peptide has also been described in other
studies; however, the reports regarding the prevalence of other
peptides diverge (Crowe et al. 1986; James and Burnstock
1988; Smet et al. 1996b; Werkstrom et al. 1998; Zhou and
Ling 1998).

Similarly, in the intramural ganglia of the bladder in adult
humans, NOS-positive cells have frequently been detected,
constituting 72 to 96% of the neuronal subpopulation (Smet
et al. 1996b; Smet et al. 1996a) (Table 9). TH-positive neurons
can be observed only occasionally, representing 14% of the
neuron population, based on tissue samples taken from pa-
tients undergoing cystectomy for bladder carcinomas or pros-
tatectomy for prostate cancer (Smet et al. 1996a, 1996b). In a
sample of patients with bladder instability and diverse voiding
problems, no CA histofluorescence-positive neurons were de-
tected, but the ubiquitous expression of acetylcholinesterase
was considered to be an indication of a ubiquitous cholinergic
transmitter phenotype (Dixon et al. 1983).

Further studies disclosed a noradrenergic component in the
intramural ganglia, depending on age (Table 9). In samples
obtained from infants aged 2 months to 3 years, and from
children who died due to accidental trauma, 40% of cells were
found to be TH-positive, compared with 60% that were TH-
negative (Dixon et al. 1997). Approximately 25% of all neu-
rons co-expressed TH and DBH, although a large proportion
of TH-positive cells lacked DBH (Dixon et al. 1999). In sam-
ples of the intramural ganglia of the human bladder neck and
trigone from male infants and children, 25% of the neurons
expressed TH alone, 50% expressed both TH and VAChT,
and 25% expressed VAChT alone (Dixon et al. 1999). These

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

219

Table 9

Expression of neurotransmitter-synthesizing enzymes and neuropeptides in intramural ganglia of human bladder

(A) The proportions of neurones immunopositive for the neurotransmitter phenotype markers NOS, TH, DBH, and VAChT. Numbers are provided for
adult tissue obtained from cancer patients and neonates, infants, and children (at 2 months to 6 years of age) dying from sudden child’s death (CD) or
accidental trauma (AT)

Age
Adult
7 weeks–6 years
2 months–3 years

Death
Cancer

CD, AT

% NOS
86%

NOS/TH+

NOS/TH−

NOS/VAChT

58%

45%

40%

(Smet et al. 1996b)

(Dixon et al. 2000)

(Dixon et al. 1997)

(B) The proportion of neurons immunopositive for noradrenergic and cholinergic markers in intramural ganglia of adult humans as compared with

neonates and children

Age
Adult
7 weeks–6 years
7 weeks–6 years
2 months–3 years

Death
Cancer

CD, AT

CD, AT

CD, AT

TH
14%

40%

TH+DBH+

TH+VAChT+

VAChT

25% no VAChT

50%

25% no TH

(Dixon et al. 1999)

75%

(Smet et al. 1996b)

(Dixon et al. 2000)

(C) The proportion of neurons immunopositive for the neuropeptides VIP, NPY, CGRP, SOM, and GAL
Age
Adult
2 months–3 years

SOM
0%
90% TH−

CGRP
0%
65% TH−

NPY
58%
90% TH−

VIP
77%
45% TH−

GAL
65%

(Dixon et al. 1997)

(Smet et al. 1996b)

(Dixon et al. 1997)

40% TH+

70% TH+

54% TH+

73% TH+

%: The overall proportion of positive cells in intramural ganglia. NOS/marker B−/+ indicates the proportion of NOS-positive cells among marker B-
negative or positive cells. In infants and children, approximately half of TH-negative as well as -positive express NOS. The corresponding numbers for
adults are not determined

Whereas 40% of the cells express TH in neonates and children, their proportion drops to 14% in adults. Coexpression of TH is observed with DBH or
VAChT

Massive changes are observed in neuropeptide expression patterns between infants and adults. The proportion of VIP-positive cells increases and of
NPY-positive cells decreases with age. Particularly striking appear the loss in CGRP and SOM expression

data indicated that a significant number of TH-positive and
CA cells during the infant and childhood stages, which are
normally reduced during adulthood appears affected in people
with bladder dysfunction. This developmental change differs
from that observed for the proportion of NOS-positive cells in
the intramural ganglia (Table 9). The proportion of TH-
positive neurons in adults decreases to little more than 10%,
whereas the proportion of NOS-positive neurons increases,
from approximately half of the neurons during childhood to
almost 90% of neurons in adults (Smet et al. 1996b; Dixon
et al. 1997; Jen et al. 1997; Dixon et al. 2000). These data
indicated the existence of a strong shift from noradrenergic to
nitrergic neurotransmission in the human intramural bladder
ganglia with increasing age.

A shift in the neuropeptide expression pattern has also been
observed from childhood to adulthood (Table 9). During this
transition, the proportion of NPY-positive neurons decreases,
from 70% of TH-positive and 90% of TH-negative cells to an
overall abundance of approximately 60% of all cells in adults
(Smet et al. 1996a; Dixon et al. 1997). In parallel, the abun-
dance of VIP-positive neurons increases from approximately
40% to close to 80%. Remarkably, the proportion of SOM-
positive neurons decreases, from approximately 70% of TH-
positive and 90% of TH-negative neurons in infants and

children to the complete absence in adults (Smet et al.
1996a; Dixon et al. 1997). Likewise, the proportion of
CGRP-positive neurons decreases, from approximately 60%
of neurons in infants and children to the complete absence in
adults. These results indicate extensive changes in the
neuromodulatory roles played by neuropeptides in the intra-
mural ganglia during the transition to adulthood.

Composition and development of the mouse pelvic
ganglia

In a comparative analysis of two different mouse strains, in-
bred C57BL/6 and outbred Quackenbush–Swiss (QS), the
neuron subpopulation composition in the pelvic ganglia of
mice was observed to be similar but not identical to those in
other rodents (Wanigasekara et al. 2003). The proportion of
noradrenergic neurons was 31 and 34%, with almost complete
coexistence between TH and DBH expression. DBH-positive,
TH-negative cells were only rarely observed. TH and ChAT
expression are complementary, with fewer than 1% of cells
found to be double-positive. Fewer than 5% of cells are nei-
ther TH- nor ChAT-positive, which indicates that noradrenergic
and cholinergic gene expression is almost completely segregated
and only a very small cell population is both non-noradrenergic

220

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

and non-cholinergic. The proportion of cholinergic neurons was
calculated to be approximately 60%. Approximately 50% of the
cells in the two mouse strains express VIP. Importantly, less
than 1% of the TH-positive neurons co-express VIP, but all
TH-positive cells co-express NPY, and a significant number of
TH-negative, cholinergic cells also co-expressed NPY. Clusters
of VIP-positive neurons were detected near the origin of the
penile nerve, within the origin of this nerve, and some distance
(1 mm from the ganglion) further distally.

The neuron numbers in the mouse pelvic ganglion were
determined based on Hu staining (Yan and Keast 2008),
which indicated the post-natal doubling of the total neuron
population. NOS and TH cells form different populations of
Hu-positive neurons at P0 compared with those in adults.
During this time, ganglion composition changes from P0
(17.5% NOS and 23.9% TH-positive, 61.5% NOS- and TH-
negative) compared with the adult (47.1% NOS-positive,
29.1% TH-positive, and 27.3% NOS- and TH-negative).
These changes may be due to the large increase in the density
of NOS-positive neurons and a smaller increase in TH-
positive neurons. No significant changes were observed for
the double-negative cells. The major increase in NOS-
positive cells was observed between P0 and P7, and the cell
numbers reach and maintain a plateau through P14, followed
by a smaller increase from P14 to P21. In contrast, the adult
TH-positive numbers are achieved by P7. The production of
new neurons occurs due to neuronal precursor cells, which are
present at P0, as characterized by the expression of p75 and
the absence of Hu/S 100.

The development of TH and NOS innervation in uro-
genital organs was analyzed in male mice (Yan and Keast
2008). In the corpus cavernosum tissue, at P7, axons are
observed at a modest density and fibers immunoreactive
for NOS more numerous than those for TH. At P14, axons
appear to be more numerous but are found at similar rela-
tive densities. In adults, the TH-positive fiber prevalence is
similar to greater than that of NOS-positive fibers. In the
bladder muscles, at all postnatal stages, NOS fibers are
much more numerous than TH fibers.

With the help of the Venus reporter transgene, under the
control of the Sox10 promoter, the emigration of sacral neural
crest cells and the population of the pelvic viscera has been
reported (Wiese et al. 2017). By E10.5, lumbosacral neural
crest cells migrate ventrally between the neural tube and so-
mites. At this early stage, neuronal differentiation can be de-
tected by HuC/D and TUJ1 staining. Between E10 and E11,
sacral neural crest cells delaminate and emigrate, both laterally
and ventrally, as a loose stream of cells. By E12.5, a definitive
pelvic ganglion becomes visible, and the pelvic plexus be-
comes populated by neural crest stem cells that travel along
the nerves coming from the spinal cord and the dorsal root
ganglia (DRG). By E14.5, glial and neuronal differentiation
commences in the pelvic ganglion. In addition to the

formation of the pelvic ganglion, the Sox10 signal can be
detected in discrete cells within the bladder body and
urethra, at E15.5 (Wiese et al. 2012). By E15.5, TH and
VAChT expression can be observed by IHC, in the region
of the pelvic ganglion. Comparisons of the genome-wide
TF expression in whole-mount mouse embryos (Gray
et al. 2004) revealed the expression of a set of TFs in
the pelvic ganglia at E15.5 (Wiese et al. 2012). These
TFs include Phox2b, Hand1 and 2, Gata2 and 3, and
HMX1, which are critically and specifically involved in
sympathetic neuron development.

A landmark finding was the observation that the ex-
pression of the Hand1 and Gata3 TFs correlated with the
absence of HMX2 and 3 during pelvic ganglion develop-
ment (Espinosa-Medina et al. 2016). HMX2 and 3 are TFs
that are specifically expressed during the development of
cranial parasympathetic post-ganglionic neurons, whereas
Hand1 and Gata3 constitute markers for sympathetic neu-
ron development (Fig. 2). In addition, interference with
motor fiber outgrowth from the sacral spinal cord does
not compromise the formation of the pelvic ganglion an-
lage, indicating that ganglion formation and cell differen-
tiation does not depend on the nerve-associated Schwann
cell precursors, unlike the cranial parasympathetic gan-
glia. In addition, pelvic ganglia form prior to innervation,
and Phox2b is not expressed in Sox10-positive cells asso-
ciated with pelvic ganglion innervation. These eminent
developmental features have resulted in the conclusion
that the pelvic ganglion should be classified as a “sympa-
thetic” ganglion (Espinosa-Medina et al. 2016).

The development of a fluorescence-assisted cell sorting
(FACS) strategy for the identification of autonomic precursors
in visceral tissues (Buehler et al. 2012) and the genetic
targeting of precursor and differentiating neuron subpopula-
tions have made analyzing the differentiation processes in
rodents possible, starting from the characterization of neural
crest precursors to the analysis of diverse pelvic neuron sub-
populations. In particular, the segregation of noradrenergic
and cholinergic neurons that operate in the pelvic domain will
be of interest. The regulation of NOS expression poses anoth-
er critical topic. The restriction of different neuropeptides to
noradrenergic and cholinergic neuron subpopulations also re-
mains an open question.

Concluding Remarks

Distribution of different peripheral autonomic neuron
populations along the body axis

Key landmarks in the organization of the peripheral autonom-
ic neurons include the prevalence of cholinergic and nitrergic
properties in the cranial parasympathetic domain, the

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

221

Fig. 2 Transcription factors in autonomic neuron differentiation.
Transcription factors detected during embryonic differentiation of
autonomic postganglionic neurons in mice are shown for cranial,
paravertebral, and pelvic ganglia. Their function, as far as they are
characterized, are indicated and discussed in the text. The basic helix-
loop-helix protein Hand 1 and the zinc finger protein Gata 3 are selective
markers for sympathetic and pelvic neuron development. The H6 family
homeobox protein homologues HMX 2 and 3 are selective markers for
cranial postganglionic neurons and distinguish parasympathetic from the
sympathetic and pelvic neuron lineages. a(Pattyn et al. 1999); b(Morin
et al. 1997; Pattyn et al. 1997); c(Coppola et al. 2005); d(Hirsch et al.

1998); e(Pattyn et al. 2006); f(Espinosa-Medina et al. 2016); g(George
et al. 1994; Lim et al. 2000; Tsarovina et al. 2004; Moriguchi et al.
2006; Tsarovina et al. 2010; Espinosa-Medina et al. 2016); h(Espinosa-
Medina et al. 2016); i(Espinosa-Medina et al. 2016); j(Doxakis et al.
2008; Espinosa-Medina et al. 2016; Firulli et al. 2017), k(Espinosa-
Medina et al. 2016); l(Müller and Rohrer 2002; VanDusen et al. 2014;
Stanzel et al. 2016); m(Howard et al. 1999; Howard et al. 2000; Lucas
et al. 2006; Morikawa et al. 2007; Hendershot et al. 2008; Schmidt et al.
2009; Vincentz et al. 2012); n(Wang et al. 2000); o(Yoshiura et al. 1998;
Furlan et al. 2013); p(Wiese et al. 2012); q(Espinosa-Medina et al. 2016)

prominence of noradrenergic properties in the paravertebral
and prevertebral sympathetic ganglia, and the mixture of these
features in the pelvic region (Fig. 3). Remarkably, a unique
combination of TFs can be observed in the embryonic cranial
parasympathetic ganglia, while a distinguished TF fingerprint
unifies sympathetic and pelvic neurons during mouse devel-
opment (Fig. 2).

In addition to the specific cranial parasympathetic TF fin-
gerprint, which encompasses the H6 homeobox family TFs
HMX2 and 3 and the basic helix loop helix TF ASCL1, the
cranial autonomic neurons are generated from different pre-
cursor cells, the Schwann cell precursor-like progenitors.
During differentiation, these cells generate cholinergic and
nitrergic neurons; however, they appear to be unable to realize
a noradrenergic transmitter phenotype, relying on the coordi-
nated expression of enzymes necessary for the synthesis of
noradrenaline, together with vesicular and plasma membrane
monoamine transporters. Surprisingly, two key enzymes, TH
and DBH, can be expressed in the domains of the developing

cranial ganglia, but are expressed separately and in an unco-
ordinated manner. A large question that remains is how the
expression of the cholinergic locus and NOS genes are ad-
dressed during the development of these neurons.

The coordinated expression of the features that characterize
the noradrenergic neuronal phenotype is typical for sympa-
thetic neuron development. However, this development ap-
pears to begin with the co-expression of the cholinergic locus,
in sympathetic progenitors and neuroblasts. How this process
is orchestrated by the known TFs, including Phox, Hand,
Gata, HMX, and Insm TFs, remains unclear. Chromatin mod-
ifications and the integration of gene loci into gene regulatory
circuits during the transition from a neural crest precursor to a
differentiated sympathetic neuron are potential mechanisms.
How this process is refined, mechanistically, how it is spatial-
ly coordinated during the segregation of noradrenergic and
cholinergic features, and how this process compares with the
processes identified in cranial parasympathetic neurons re-
main key questions that must be answered.

222

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

Fig. 3 Presence of the classical neurotransmitters noradrenaline and
acetylcholine, the small molecule neuromodulator nitric oxide and the
neuropeptides NPY and VIP in cranial autonomic, sympathetic, and
pelvic ganglia. The length of the bars indicate the proportion of neurons
positive for the respective marker. The horizontal position indicates

presence in cranial, sympathetic, and pelvic ganglia as well as their co-
expression with other markers. Both proportion and co-expression are
detailed in the manuscript text and tables. Data shown are mainly from
rat. As for rat pelvic ganglia, quantification of the proportion of DBH-
positive cells is not available; data from the guinea pig are shown

The development of the pelvic nervous system in mice
depends on the same TFs as the development of the sympa-
thetic nervous system; therefore, similar questions must be
answered for the sympathetic and pelvic nervous systems.
How many neural crest-derived progenitors become mixed
noradrenergic/cholinergic immature neurons? Which process-
es regulate the segregation of noradrenergic and cholinergic
features and result in the diverse ratios of the two subtypes
observed in different mammalian groups? What processes
govern the co-expression or segregation of nitrergic features
with either of the other two primary transmitter phenotypes?
How is the expression of small-molecule neurotransmitter
phenotypes coordinated with neuropeptide expression and
which roles are played by target tissues during these process-
es? Finally, the presence of gender-specific neuron popula-
tions and their distribution and generation remains an unre-
solved topic.

The diversity of autonomic neurons is apparent in the differ-
ential co-expression of neuropeptides with the classical norad-
renergic, cholinergic, and nitrergic transmitter phenotypes.
These various patterns equip individual neurons with specific
signaling fingerprints, often referred to as neurochemical codes.
A critical observation was made during rat postnatal develop-
ment, in which the cholinergic sweat gland-innervating neurons
appeared to acquire their mature neurotransmitter phenotypes
by switching from a noradrenergic to a cholinergic phenotype,
co-expressing the neuropeptide VIP under the influence of
target-derived growth factors. This finding shaped the con-
cept of critical neuron–target interactions, which may be
responsible for the final maturation of innervating neu-
ron properties and may reflect the co-expression of clas-
sical neurotransmitters and neuropeptides in target-
specific combinations. Target-dependent differentiation
has subsequently been described for two noradrenergic

neuron subtypes that innervate the piloerector and nip-
ple erector muscles.

The observation that VIP can be detected in cholinergic
sympathetic neurons that innervate the sweat glands of rats
(Landis and Fredieu 1986), cats (Lindh et al. 1989;
Anderson et al. 1995), and humans (Schulze et al. 1997;
Donadio et al. 2019) revealed the first example of the conser-
vation of a transmittal signaling code across multiple mamma-
lian orders. This signaling code includes a sweat gland–
derived neurokine, which acts as a differentiation factor
through the activation of the LIFRβ/gp130 receptors in mice
and humans (Stanke et al. 2006; Di Leo et al. 2010; Melone
et al. 2014). In addition, the finding that NPY is absent from
noradrenergic piloerector sympathetic innervating neurons in
guinea pigs (Gibbins 1992), mice (Furlan et al. 2016), and
humans (Donadio et al. 2019) strengthens the concept that
target-specific autonomic pathways are characterized by a
conserved signaling code, composed of a classical neurotrans-
mitter, with or without a distinguishing neuropeptide. An in-
teresting exception was detected in non-noradrenergic, VIP-
positive sympathetic fibers directed toward guinea pig
(Gibbins 1992) and cat (Lindh et al. 1989; Anderson et al.
1995) blood vessels in muscles that are considered to act as
muscle vasodilators. Similar fibers cannot be detected in rats
and mice (Guidry and Landis 2000).

Taken together, this wealth of data indicates the existence
of conserved and non-conserved autonomic neurotransmitter/
modulator codes along the rostrocaudal body axis and for
target-specific efferent pathways. The mechanisms through
which target-specific autonomic neural circuits are established
during development and connect pre-ganglionic with post-
ganglionic neurons and their target tissues are incompletely
understood. The exploration of the full transcriptomes of these
diverse neuron populations and individual neurons is likely to

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

223

provide insights into the molecular players that may be in-
volved in these processes.

Integration of autonomic neuron subpopulations into
target-specific efferent pathways

Comparative analysis of the reflex changes in sympathetic
neuron activity in response to various stimuli has demonstrat-
ed the selective regulation of distinct target-specific neuronal
pathways to be a key factor in the neural regulation of homeo-
stasis (Jänig 2006). Through the characterization of full
transcriptomes in different autonomic neuron populations,
using RNA sequencing methods (Furlan et al. 2016; Zeisel
et al. 2018), the molecular fingerprints of neuronal diversity
have also revealed expression of the molecular players poten-
tially involved in the generation of target-specific pathways,
synapse formation, and stabilization, and promise to shed light
on the molecular mechanisms underlying their integration into
target-specific efferent pathways (Ernsberger 2019).

In particular, the expression of proteins involved in cell
adhesion, contact formation, and synapse organization is of

interest. Screening the data available for thoracic sympa-
thetic neurons (Furlan et al. 2016) (Supplementary figure
4, nn4376) has provided first hints regarding the critical
molecular players. Comparing the mean expression levels
for a range of protein classes (Fig. 4) revealed only minor
differences in the transcript expression levels between nor-
adrenergic and cholinergic sympathetic neuron populations
for the classical cell adhesion molecules Ncam1 and 2 and
L1cam. Similarly, expression level differences in ephrins
and their receptors were modest, including for the most
highly expressed family members Efna5 and Epha5.
More robust are the differences in transcript levels between
sympathetic neuron classes for the semaphorin receptors,
Neuropilin 1 and Plexin 4.

The most impressive differentially expressed transcripts
that have been identified are those for selected protocadherin
(Pcdhn) family members, which represent a group of proteins
that have been recognized for their importance in multiple
steps of neural circuit formation (Peek et al. 2017;
Mountoufaris et al. 2018). The differences are comparable
with those observed among the vesicular neurotransmitter

Fig. 4 The expression of cell
adhesion molecules, axonal
outgrowth and synaptic organizer
proteins in noradrenergic and
cholinergic classes of mouse
sympathetic neurons. The mean
number of transcripts for the
indicated genes are shown as
determined by single cell RNA
sequencing for the indicated
populations of noradrenergic
(NA1–5) and cholinergic (Ach1,
2) neurons from mouse thoracic
sympathetic ganglia as provided
by Furlan et al. (2016;
supplementary table nn 4376-S4)

224

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

transporters, which are the markers best suited for the charac-
terization of noradrenergic and cholinergic neurons (Fig. 3).
Transcript levels for Pcdh17 in cholinergic sympathetic neu-
rons were, on average, 10-fold the levels observed in norad-
renergic neurons. Comparable expression levels in noradren-
ergic neurons were detected for Pcdh 7, 9, 10 and Pcdha5.
Importantly, the expression levels for the individual genes
differ between the individual sympathetic neuron classes by
up to 39-fold. In combination, these five protocadherin gene
products seem sufficient to provide a chemical code specific
for each sympathetic neuron class.

These findings indicate the need for an in-depth analysis of
the role played by Pcdhns in the target-specific regulation of
sympathetic effector functions, the establishment of target-
specific neuronal pathways, and the developmental generation
of neuronal class-specific Pcdhn gene expression patterns.

Autonomic neurotransmitter plasticity in aging and
degenerative processes: dysregulation of
homeostatic control mechanisms

The stunning observation of the progression from mixed
noradrenergic/cholinergic precursors to mature cells with seg-
regated transmitter phenotypes during sympathetic neuron de-
velopment was complemented by recent studies showing the
expression of noradrenergic markers in mature cholinergic
sympathetic neurons, as analyzed by RNA sequencing in mice
(Furlan et al. 2016) and confocal imaging in humans (Donadio
et al. 2019). Together with the changing prevalence of VIP-
positive cholinergic stellate neurons in humans, from neonates
and children to adults (Roudenok et al. 1999), and the in-
creased expression of VIP in sympathetic neurons after acute
myocardial infarction (Roudenok and Schmitt 2001), ques-
tions regarding the stability and plasticity of transmitter phe-
notypes during aging and disease processes represent key is-
sues that must be addressed.

The detection of cholinergic transdifferentiation in the car-
diac sympathetic nervous systems of humans and rodents dur-
ing congestive heart failure and myocardial infarction, under
the control of gp130-mediated mechanisms (Kanazawa et al.
2010; Olivas et al. 2016), demonstrates the depth to which
developmental pathways that regulate autonomic neuron
transmitter phenotypes can modulate the peripheral elements
of autonomic control circuits in disease processes (Habecker
et al. 2016).

High levels of sympathetic drive, associated with several
cardiovascular diseases, including congestive myocardial in-
farction and hypertension, prompt the question for the com-
ponent of sympathetic hyperactivity residing at the level of
post-ganglionic neurons (Grassi et al. 2012; Shanks et al.
2013). A critical role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular
diseases is now recognized for NPY (Tan et al. 2018).
Increased plasma levels of NPY and noradrenaline in patients

with hypertension are considered indicators of enhanced sym-
pathetic activity. In hypertensive rats, a developmental abnor-
mality was observed in the numbers of NPY-positive cells, but
differences in the amounts of TH and NPY IR in neuronal cell
bodies were not detected (Gurusinghe et al. 1990, 1991).
However, peripheral hyperinnervation is considered to be a
major player in the functional changes observed in hyperten-
sive rats (Head 1989). Hypertrophy of the neurons (Kondo
et al. 1990) and their dendritic arbor (Peruzzi et al. 1991) have
been reported in spontaneously hypertensive rats. Taken to-
gether, these results indicate the different activity statuses of
postganglionic neurons, including increased transmitter and
modulator release. The extent to which changes in the balance
between noradrenergic and cholinergic phenotypes, and pos-
sibly between the nitrergic and purinergic properties of sym-
pathetic neurons, affect disease states remains unclear.

Autonomic dysfunction constitutes a hallmark of a diverse
range of neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinson’s dis-
ease and other synucleinopathies, diabetic neuropathies, and
multiple sclerosis (Rafanelli et al. 2019). In addition, selective
autonomic dysfunction may be associated with rare diseases,
such as familial dysautonomia or pure autonomic dysfunction.
Dysfunctions that affect autonomic homeostatic regulation can
compromise cardiovascular and thermoregulatory control and
the functions of the pelvic organs. Depending on the nature and
severity of the disease, these functional changes may present
with different time sequences, combinations, and intensities.

Advances in the clinical assessments of functional subsys-
tems in the ANS have resulted from improved sudomotor
testing, to complement the more conveniently recordable car-
diovascular biosignals (Vinik et al. 2015; Ziemssen and
Siepmann 2019). Quantitative results of sudomotor axon re-
flexes in Parkinson’s disease can be correlated with the pres-
ence of VIP in skin samples, to yield a measure of sweat gland
activity and neuromodulator expression in the innervating
sympathetic sudomotor neurons (Kawada et al. 2009).
Comparably, sudomotor testing in diabetes allows correla-
tions to be examined between peripheral autonomic fiber den-
sity, the degree of dysfunction (Gibbons et al. 2009; Krieger
et al. 2018), and neuropeptide contents (Liu et al. 2015).
Surprisingly, VIP levels in affected skin areas undergo an
initial increase (Properzi et al. 1993), before ultimately declin-
ing (Levy et al. 1989, 1992). In multiple sclerosis, peripheral
neuropathy has been associated with sudomotor dysfunction
(Khan et al. 2018) and compromised sudomotor function has
been correlated with impaired thermoregulatory sweating
(Saari et al. 2008). Although disturbances in thermoregulation
are known to constitute an important autonomic deficit in
multiple sclerosis (Davis et al. 2010; Habek et al. 2016),
IHC analyses of sweat gland innervation are currently lacking.
In addition, studies of the cholinergic neurons in autonomic
ganglia are lacking not only for multiple sclerosis but also for
Parkinson’s disease and diabetes.

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

225

These studies exemplify approaches in which the neuro-
transmitter and neuromodulator features of post-ganglionic
autonomic neurons are analyzed in the context of key auto-
nomic dysfunctions and disease. This line of investigation has
been pursued intensely in the human and rodent sympathetic
nervous systems, in which changes in neuronal phenotypes,
observed after myocardial infarctions, and alterations in
peptidergic phenotypes in Parkinson’s disease and diabetes,
mark particularly interesting cases. The human pelvic plexus,
which has been less intensely studied along these lines, will be
an even more challenging subject due to the extensive devel-
opmental regulation of neuronal phenotypes and the co-
expression of noradrenergic, cholinergic, and nitrergic fea-
tures. Pelvic floor dysfunctions make a particularly relevant
example because of their age and gender-specific manifesta-
tions (Dieter et al. 2015). The expression of gender-specific
differences in pelvic extramural and intramural neuron popu-
lations and their contributions to the diverse voiding and sex-
ual dysfunctions observed in men and women have not been
analyzed in sufficient detail, in humans. The significant
changes in neuron population compositions associated with
aging are also incompletely understood.

One subsystem associated with the autonomic innervation
of pelvic organs, which has been characterized in some detail,
is the innervation of the lower urinary tract (de Groat and
Yoshimura 2015). Age-dependent alterations in the numbers
of noradrenergic relative to cholinergic neurons have been
observed for the intramural bladder ganglia, changing the bal-
ance between these two neurotransmitter pathways. The use of
anticholinergic drugs for the treatment of overactive bladder
among elderly individuals can tune these regulatory paths
(Wagg 2018); however, the presence of numerous other
neuromodulators in this system can also explain the insuffi-
ciency of this approach (Woodford 2018). Geriatric urinary
incontinence (Ouslander 1992) is likely to remain an interna-
tional problem (Searcy 2017), and the extent to which central
and peripheral mechanisms contribute to stress incontinence
(Yoshimura and Miyazato 2012), compared with geriatric uri-
nary incontinence, should be explored.

Summary and perspective

Taken together, these results have contributed to the increasing
understanding of neuronal populations in the diverse autonom-
ic ganglia including a highly refined knowledge regarding their
transcriptomes. The transcriptomes provide quantitative data on
axonal outgrowth and synaptic organizer molecules to indicate
players involved in the formation of target specific homeostasis
circuits. Insight into disease-associated plasticity of neuronal
properties, and age-dependent transformations, has changed
our understanding of the autonomic neuron pools and circuits
that operate in homeostasis. In combination with improving
clinical assessment instruments for analyzing autonomic

dysfunction, these advances will greatly improve our insights
into autonomic control and the disturbances that manifest dur-
ing aging and disease. These advances need to be exploited for
the development of personalized treatment strategies that con-
sider age, gender, and disease duration of individual human
patients affected by autonomic dysfunction and the underlying
diseases.

Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge critical com-
ments to the manuscript by Janet Keast. UE thanks Ute Wagner and
Pedro Zieba with Quo Vadis for making the work on this manuscript
possible.

Funding Open Access funding provided by Projekt DEAL. HR is sup-
ported by the Wilhelm-Sander-Stiftung.

Compliance with Ethical Statements

Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.

Ethical Approval This article does not contain any studies with human
participants or animals performed by the authors

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, pro-
vide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were
made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References

Alm P, Uvelius B, Ekstrom J, Holmqvist B, Larsson B, Andersson KE
(1995) Nitric oxide synthase-containing neurons in rat parasympa-
thetic, sympathetic and sensory ganglia: a comparative study.
Histochem J 27:819–831

Anderson CR, McAllen RM, Edwards SL (1995) Nitric oxide synthase
and chemical coding in cat sympathetic postganglionic neurons.
Neuroscience 68:255–264

Anderson RL, Gibbins IL, Morris JL (1997) Five inhibitory transmitters
coexist in pelvic autonomic vasodilatory neurons. Neuroreport 8:
3023–3028

Apostolova G, Dechant G (2009) Development of neurotransmitter phe-
notypes in sympathetic neurons. Auton Neurosci 151:30–38
Arellano J, Xelhuantzi N, Mirto N, Hernandez ME, Cruz Y (2019) Neural
interrelationships of autonomic ganglia from the pelvic region of
male rats. Auton Neurosci 217:26–34

Baffi J, Gorcs T, Slowik F, Horvath M, Lekka N, Pasztor E, Palkovits M
(1992) Neuropeptides in the human superior cervical ganglion.
Brain Res 570:272–278

Beesley JE (1995) Histochemical methods for detecting nitric oxide syn-

thase. Histochem J 27:757–769

226

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

Beveridge TS, Johnson M, Power NE, Allman BL (2016) Histological
verification of the prehypogastric and ovarian ganglia confirms a
bilaterally symmetrical organization of the ganglia comprising the
aortic plexus in female human cadavers. J Anat 228:805–811
Boeva V et al (2017) Heterogeneity of neuroblastoma cell identity de-
fined by transcriptional circuitries. Nat Genet 49:1408–1413
Bronner-Fraser M (1995) Patterning of the vertebrate neural crest.

Perspect Dev Neurobiol 3:53–62

Buehler DP, Wiese CB, Skelton SB, Southard-Smith EM (2012) An
optimized procedure for fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) isolation of autonomic neural progenitors from visceral or-
gans of fetal mice. Journal of visualized experiments : JoVE:e4188.
Burau K, Stenull I, Huber K, Misawa H, Berse B, Unsicker K, Ernsberger
U (2004) c-ret regulates cholinergic properties in mouse sympathetic
neurons: evidence from mutant mice. Eur J Neurosci 20:353–362

Burnstock G (2013) Cotransmission in the autonomic nervous system.

Handb Clin Neurol 117:23–35

Ceccatelli S, Lundberg JM, Zhang X, Aman K, Hokfelt T (1994)
Immunohistochemical demonstration of nitric oxide synthase in
the peripheral autonomic nervous system. Brain Res 656:381–395
Chen Z, Li G, Liu J (2020) Autonomic dysfunction in Parkinson’s dis-
ease: implications for pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment.
Neurobiol Dis 134:104700

Cochard P, Goldstein M, Black IB (1978) Ontogenetic appearance and
disappearance of tyrosine hydroxylase and catecholamines in the rat
embryo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 75:2986–2990

Coppola E, d'Autreaux F, Rijli FM, Brunet JF (2010) Ongoing roles of
Phox2 homeodomain transcription factors during neuronal differen-
tiation. Development (Cambridge, England) 137:4211–4220
Coppola E, Pattyn A, Guthrie SC, Goridis C, Studer M (2005) Reciprocal
gene replacements reveal unique functions for Phox2 paralogous ho-
meobox genes during neural differentiation. EMBO J 24:4392–4403
Crowe R, Haven AJ, Burnstock G (1986) Intramural neurons of the
guinea-pig urinary bladder: histochemical localization of putative
neurotransmitters in cultures and newborn animals. J Auton Nerv
Syst 15:319–339

Csati A, Tajti J, Kuris A, Tuka B, Edvinsson L, Warfvinge K (2012)
Distribution of vasoactive intestinal peptide, pituitary adenylate
cyclase-activating peptide, nitric oxide synthase, and their receptors
in human and rat sphenopalatine ganglion. Neuroscience 202:158–
168

Dail WG, Evan AP, Eason HR (1975) The major ganglion in the pelvic
plexus of the male rat: a histochemical and ultrastructural study. Cell
Tissue Res 159:49–62

Dale HH, Feldberg W (1934) The chemical transmission of secretory
impulses to the sweat glands of the cat. J Physiol 82:121–128
Darland DC, Nishi R (1998) Activin A and follistatin influence expres-
sion of somatostatin in the ciliary ganglion in vivo. Dev Biol 202:
293–303

Darland DC, Link BA, Nishi R (1995) Activin A and follistatin expres-
sion in developing targets of ciliary ganglion neurons suggests a role
in regulating neurotransmitter phenotype. Neuron 15:857–866
Davis SL, Wilson TE, White AT, Frohman EM (2010) Thermoregulation

in multiple sclerosis. J Appl Physiol 109:1531–1537

de Groat WC, Yoshimura N (2015) Anatomy and physiology of the lower

urinary tract. Handb Clin Neurol 130:61–108

Dhami D, Mitchell BS (1991) Specific patterns of immunoreactivity in
neuronal elements of the anterior major pelvic ganglion of the male
guinea-pig. J Anat 176:197–210

Di Leo R, Nolano M, Boman H, Pierangeli G, Provitera V, Knappskog
PM, Cortelli P, Vita G, Rodolico C (2010) Central and peripheral
autonomic failure in cold-induced sweating syndrome type 1.
Neurology 75:1567–1569

Dieter AA, Wilkins MF, Wu JM (2015) Epidemiological trends and
future care needs for pelvic floor disorders. Curr Opin Obstet
Gynecol 27:380–384

Ding YQ, Takada M, Kaneko T, Mizuno N (1995) Colocalization of
vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and nitric oxide in penis-
innervating neurons in the major pelvic ganglion of the rat.
Neurosci Res 22:129–131

Dixon JS, Jen PY, Gosling JA (1997) A double-label immunohistochem-
ical study of intramural ganglia from the human male urinary blad-
der neck. J Anat 190(Pt 1):125–134

Dixon JS, Jen PY, Gosling JA (1999) Tyrosine hydroxylase and vesicular
acetylcholine transporter are coexpressed in a high proportion of
intramural neurons of the human neonatal and child urinary bladder.
Neurosci Lett 277:157–160

Dixon JS, Jen PY, Gosling JA (2000) The distribution of vesicular ace-
tylcholine transporter in the human male genitourinary organs and
its co-localization with neuropeptide Y and nitric oxide synthase.
Neurourol Urodyn 19:185–194

Dixon JS, Gilpin SA, Gilpin CJ, Gosling JA (1983) Intramural ganglia of

the human urinary bladder. Br J Urol 55:195–198

Donadio V, Incensi A, Vacchiano V, Infante R, Magnani M, Liguori R
(2019) The autonomic innervation of hairy skin in humans: an
in vivo confocal study. Sci Rep 9:16982

Doxakis E, Howard L, Rohrer H, Davies AM (2008) HAND transcription
factors are required for neonatal sympathetic neuron survival.
EMBO Rep

Dyachuk V, Furlan A, Shahidi MK, Giovenco M, Kauka N,
Konstantinidou C, Pachnis V, Memic F, Marklund U, Müller T,
Birchmeier C, Fried K, Ernfors P, Adameyko I (2014)
Parasympathetic neurons originate from nerve-associated peripheral
glial progenitors. Science 345:82–87

Ehmke H, Junemann KP, Mayer B, Kummer W (1995) Nitric oxide syn-
thase and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide colocalization in neurons
innervating the human penile circulation. Int J Impot Res 7:147–156
Elfvin L-G, Lindh B, Hökfelt T (1993) The chemical neuroanatomy of

sympathetic ganglia. Annu Rev Neurosci 16:471–507

Elfvin LG, Holmberg K, Emson P, Schemann M, Hokfelt T (1997) Nitric
oxide synthase, choline acetyltransferase, catecholamine enzymes
and neuropeptides and their colocalization in the anterior pelvic
ganglion, the inferior mesenteric ganglion and the hypogastric nerve
of the male guinea pig. J Chem Neuroanat 14:33–49

Ernsberger U (2000) Evidence for an evolutionary conserved role
of bone morphogenetic protein growth factors and phox2
transcription factors during noradrenergic differentiation of
sympathetic neurons. Induction of a putative synexpression
group of neurotransmitter-synthesizing enzymes. Eur J
Biochem 267:6976–6981

Ernsberger U (2019) The autonomic nervous system: delineating histor-
ical landmarks and their translation to target autonomic dysfunctions
in multiple sclerosis. EMJ Neurology 7:90–99

Ernsberger U, Rohrer H (1996) The development of the noradrenergic
transmitter phenotype in postganglionic sympathetic neurons.
Neurochem Res 21:829–835

Ernsberger U, Rohrer H (1999) Development of the cholinergic neuro-
transmitter phenotype in postganglionic sympathetic neurons. Cell
Tissue Res 297:339–361

Ernsberger U, Rohrer H (2018) Sympathetic tales: subdivisions of the
autonomic nervous system and the impact of developmental studies.
Neural Dev 13:20

Ernsberger U, Patzke H, Rohrer H (1997) The developmental expression
of choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) and the neuropeptide VIP in
chick sympathetic neurons: evidence for different regulatory events
in cholinergic differentiation. Mech Dev 68:115–126

Ernsberger U, Kramer M, Tsarovina K, Deller T, Rohrer H (2017)
Coordinate expression of pan-neuronal and functional signature
genes in sympathetic neurons. Cell Tissue Res 370:227–241
Ernsberger U, Patzke H, Tissier-Seta JP, Reh T, Goridis C, Rohrer H
(1995) The expression of tyrosine hydroxylase and the transcription
factors cPhox-2 and Cash-1: evidence for distinct inductive steps in

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

227

the differentiation of chick sympathetic precursor cells. Mech Dev
52:125–136

immunoreactivity in single rat sympathetic neurons: effects of pre-
ganglionic nerve activity. J Neurosci Res 29:68–76

Espinosa-Medina I, Saha O, Boismoreau F, Chettouh Z, Rossi F,
Richardson WD, Brunet JF (2016) The sacral autonomic outflow
is sympathetic. Science 354:893–897

Espinosa-Medina I, Outin E, Picard CA, Chettouh Z, Dymecki S,
Consalez GG, Coppola E, Brunet J-F (2014) Parasympathetic gan-
glia derive from Schwann cell precursors. Science 345:87–90
Falck B, Hilarp NA, Theme G, Torp A (1962) Fluorescence of catechol-
amines and related compounds with formaldehyde. J Histochem
Cytochem 10:348–354

Firulli BA, Milliar H, Toolan KP, Harkin J, Fuchs RK, Robling AG,
Firulli AB (2017) Defective Hand1 phosphoregulation uncovers es-
sential roles for Hand1 in limb morphogenesis. Development
(Cambridge, England) 144:2480-2489.

Forrest SL, Osborne PB, Keast JR (2014) Characterization of axons ex-
pressing the artemin receptor in the female rat urinary bladder: a
comparison with other major neuronal populations. J Comp
Neurol 522:3900–3927

Fritzsch B, Elliott KL, Glover JC (2017) Gaskell revisited: new insights
into spinal autonomics necessitate a revised motor neuron nomen-
clature. Cell Tissue Res 370:195–209

Furlan A, Lubke M, Adameyko I, Lallemend F, Ernfors P (2013) The
transcription factor Hmx1 and growth factor receptor activities con-
trol sympathetic neurons diversification. EMBO J 32:1613–1625
Furlan A, La Manno G, Lubke M, Haring M, Abdo H, Hochgerner H,
Kupari J, Usoskin D, Airaksinen MS, Oliver G, Linnarsson S,
Ernfors P (2016) Visceral motor neuron diversity delineates a cellu-
lar basis for nipple- and pilo-erection muscle control. Nat Neurosci
19:1331–1340

Furness JB, Costa M (1973) The ramifications of adrenergic nerve termi-
nals in the rectum, anal sphincter and anal accessory muscles of the
guinea-pig. Zeitschrift fur Anatomie und Entwicklungsgeschichte
140:109–128

Gaskell WH (1886) On the structure, distribution and function of the
nerves which innervate the visceral and vascular systems. J
Physiol 7(1-80):89

George KM, Leonard MW, Roth ME, Lieuw KH, Kioussis D, Grosveld F,
Engel JD (1994) Embryonic expression and cloning of the murine
GATA-3 gene. Development (Cambridge, England) 120:2673-2686.
Gibbins IL (1992) Vasoconstrictor, vasodilator and pilomotor pathways
in sympathetic ganglia of guinea-pigs. Neuroscience 47:657–672
Gibbons CH, Illigens BM, Wang N, Freeman R (2009) Quantification of
sweat gland innervation: a clinical-pathologic correlation.
Neurology 72:1479–1486

Grassi G, Bertoli S, Seravalle G (2012) Sympathetic nervous system: role
in hypertension and in chronic kidney disease. Current opinion in
nephrology and hypertension 21:46-51.

Gray PA et al (2004) Mouse brain organization revealed through direct

genome-scale TF expression analysis. SCIENCE 306:2255–2257

Grozdanovic Z, Goessl C (1999) Comparative localization of heme
oxygenase-2 and nitric oxide synthase in the autonomic innervation
to the human ductus deferens and seminal vesicle. J Urol 162:2156–
2161

Guidry G, Landis SC (1998) Target-dependent development of the ve-
sicular acetylcholine transporter in rodent sweat gland innervation.
DevBiol 199:175–184

Guidry G, Landis SC (2000) Absence of cholinergic sympathetic inner-
vation from limb muscle vasculature in rats and mice. Auton
Neurosci Basic Clin 82:97–108

Gurusinghe CJ, Harris PJ, Abbott DF, Bell C (1990) Neuropeptide Y in
rat sympathetic neurons is altered by genetic hypertension and by
age. Hypertension 16:63–71

Habecker BA, Symes AJ, Stahl N, Francis NJ, Economides A, Fink JS,
Yancopoulos G, Landis SC (1997) A sweat gland-derived differen-
tiation activity acts through known cytokine signaling pathways. J
Biol Chem 272:30421–30428

Habecker BA, Anderson ME, Birren SJ, Fukuda K, Herring N, Hoover
DB, Kanazawa H, Paterson DJ, Ripplinger CM (2016) Molecular
and cellular neurocardiology: development, and cellular and molec-
ular adaptations to heart disease. J Physiol 594:3853–3875

Habek M, Crnosija L, Lovric M, Junakovic A, Krbot Skoric M, Adamec I
(2016) Sympathetic cardiovascular and sudomotor functions are fre-
quently affected in early multiple sclerosis. Clin Auton Res 26:385–
393

Hall AK, MacPhedran SE (1995) Multiple mechanisms regulate sympa-
thetic neuronal phenotype. Development (Cambridge, England)
121:2361-2371.

Hauser-Kronberger C, Hacker GW, Graf AH, Mack D, Sundler F, Dietze
O, Frick J (1994) Neuropeptides in the human penis: an immuno-
histochemical study. J Androl 15:510–520

Head RJ (1989) Hypernoradrenergic innervation: its relationship to func-
tional and hyperplastic changes in the vasculature of the spontane-
ously hypertensive rat. Blood Vessels 26:1–20

Hedlund P, Ny L, Alm P, Andersson KE (2000) Cholinergic nerves in
human corpus cavernosum and spongiosum contain nitric oxide
synthase and heme oxygenase. J Urol 164:868–875

Hendershot TJ, Liu H, Clouthier DE, Shepherd IT, Coppola E, Studer M,
Firulli AB, Pittman DL, Howard MJ (2008) Conditional deletion of
Hand2 reveals critical functions in neurogenesis and cell type-specific
gene expression for development of neural crest-derived noradrener-
gic sympathetic ganglion neurons. Dev Biol 319:179–191

Hirsch MR, Tiveron MC, Guillemot F, Brunet JF, Goridis C (1998)
Control of noradrenergic differentiation and Phox2a expression by
MASH1 in the central and peripheral nervous system. Development
(Cambridge, England) 125:599-608.

Hokfelt T, Ljungdahl A, Terenius L, Elde R, Nilsson G (1977)
Immunohistochemical analysis of peptide pathways possibly related
to pain and analgesia: enkephalin and substance P. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 74:3081–3085

Horn JP (2018) The sacral autonomic outflow is parasympathetic:

Langley got it right. Clin Auton Res 28:181–185

Houdeau E, Prud'homme MJ, Rousseau A, Rousseau JP (1995)
Distribution of noradrenergic neurons in the female rat pelvic plexus
and involvement in the genital tract innervation. J Auton Nerv Syst
54:113–125

Houdeau E, Boyer PA, Rousseau A, Rousseau JP (1997) Coexpression of
neuropeptide Y and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide in pelvic plex-
us neurones innervating the uterus and cervix in the rat. Cell Tissue
Res 288:285–292

Howard M, Foster DN, Cserjesi P (1999) Expression of Hand gene prod-
ucts may be sufficient for the differentiation of avian neural crest-
derived cells into catecholaminergic neurons in culture. Dev Biol
215:62–77

Howard MJ, Stanke M, Schneider C, Wu X, Rohrer H (2000) The tran-
scription factor dHAND is a downstream effector of BMPs in sym-
pathetic neuron specification. Development (Cambridge, England)
127:4073-4081.

Huang T, Hu J, Wang B, Nie Y, Geng J, Cheng L (2013) Tlx3 controls
cholinergic transmitter and peptide phenotypes in a subset of prena-
tal sympathetic neurons. J Neurosci 33:10667–10675

Huber K, Ernsberger U (2006) Cholinergic differentiation occurs early in
mouse sympathetic neurons and requires Phox2b. Gene Expr 13:
133–139

Gurusinghe CJ, Harris PJ, Abbott DF, Messina A, Bell C (1991)
Quantitation of tyrosine hydroxylase and neuropeptide Y

Huber K, Narasimhan P, Shtukmaster S, Pfeifer D, Evans SM, Sun Y
(2013) The LIM-Homeodomain transcription factor Islet-1 is

228

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

required for the development of sympathetic neurons and adrenal
chromaffin cells. Dev Biol 380:286–298

Ignarro LJ (2019) Nitric oxide is not just blowing in the wind. Br J

Pharmacol 176:131–134

Imai K, Furuya K, Kawada M, Kinugasa Y, Omote K, Namiki A,
Uchiyama E, Murakami G (2006) Human pelvic extramural gangli-
on cells: a semiquantitative and immunohistochemical study. Surg
Radiol Anat 28:596–605

James S, Burnstock G (1988) Neuropeptide Y-like immunoreactivity in
intramural ganglia of the newborn guinea pig urinary bladder. Regul
Pept 23:237–245

Jänig W (2006) The integrative action of the autonomic nervous system:
neurobiology of homeostasis. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge

Jarvi R, Helen P, Pelto-Huikko M, Hervonen A (1986) Neuropeptide Y
(NPY)-like immunoreactivity in rat sympathetic neurons and small
granule-containing cells. Neurosci Lett 67:223–227

Jarvi R, Helen P, Hervonen A, Pelto-Huikko M (1989) Vasoactive intes-
tinal peptide (VIP)-like immunoreactivity in the human sympathetic
ganglia. Histochemistry 90:347–351

Jen PY, Dixon JS, Gosling JA (1996a) Co-localisation of tyrosine hy-
droxylase, nitric oxide synthase and neuropeptides in neurons of the
human postnatal male pelvic ganglia. J Auton Nerv Syst 59:41–50
Jen PY, Dixon JS, Gosling JA (1997) Co-localization of nitric oxide syn-
thase, neuropeptides and tyrosine hydroxylase in nerves supplying the
human post-natal vas deferens and seminal vesicle. Br J Urol 80:291–
299

Jen PY, Dixon JS, Gosling JA (1999) Colocalisation of neuropeptides,
nitric oxide synthase and immunomarkers for catecholamines in nerve
fibres of the adult human vas deferens. J Anat 195(Pt 4):481–489
Jen PY, Dixon JS, Gearhart JP, Gosling JA (1996b) Nitric oxide synthase
and tyrosine hydroxylase are colocalized in nerves supplying the
postnatal human male genitourinary organs. J Urol 155:1117–1121
Kalcheim C (2015) Epithelial–mesenchymal transitions during neural

crest and somite development. J Clin Med 5

Kalcheim C (2018) Neural crest emigration: from start to stop. Genesis

56:e23090

Kanazawa H, Ieda M, Kimura K, Arai T, Kawaguchi-Manabe H,
Matsuhashi T, Endo J, Sano M, Kawakami T, Kimura T,
Monkawa T, Hayashi M, Iwanami A, Okano H, Okada Y,
Ishibashi-Ueda H, Ogawa S, Fukuda K (2010) Heart failure causes
cholinergic transdifferentiation of cardiac sympathetic nerves via
gp130-signaling cytokines in rodents. J Clin Invest 120:408–421
Kawada M, Tamada Y, Simizu H, Yanagishita T, Yamashita N, Ishida N,
Watanabe D, Yoshida M, Ibi T, Sahashi K, Hashizume Y,
Matsumoto Y (2009) Reduction in QSART and vasoactive intestinal
polypeptide expression in the skin of Parkinson’s disease patients
and its relation to dyshidrosis. J Cutan Pathol 36:517–521

Keast JR (1991) Patterns of co-existence of peptides and differences of
nerve fibre types associated with noradrenergic and non-
noradrenergic (putative cholinergic) neurons in the major pelvic
ganglion of the male rat. Cell Tissue Res 266:405–415

Keast JR (1995a) Visualization and immunohistochemical characteriza-
tion of sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons in the male rat
major pelvic ganglion. Neuroscience 66(3):655–662

Keast JR (1995b) Visualization and immunohistochemical characteriza-
tion of sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons in the male rat
major pelvic ganglion. Neuroscience 3:655–662

Keast JR, de Groat WC (1989) Immunohistochemical characterization of
pelvic neurons which project to the bladder, colon, or penis in rats. J
Comp Neurol 288:387–400

Keast JR, De Groat WC (1992) Segmental distribution and peptide con-
tent of primary afferent neurons innervating the urogenital organs
and colon of male rats. J Comp Neurol 319:615–623

Keast JR, Luckensmeyer GB, Schemann M (1995) All pelvic neurons in
male rats contain immunoreactivity for the synthetic enzymes of
either noradrenaline or acetylcholine. Neurosci Lett 196:209–212

Khan A, Kamran S, Ponirakis G, Akhtar N, Khan R, George P, Babu BM,
Ibrahim FM, Petropoulos IN, Canibano BG, Wilins SS, Deleu D,
Shuaib A, Malik RA (2018) Peripheral neuropathy in patients with
multiple sclerosis. PLoS One 13:e0193270

Kirch W, Neuhuber W, Tamm ER (1995) Immunohistochemical locali-
zation of neuropeptides in the human ciliary ganglion. Brain Res
681:229–234

Kiyokawa H, Katori Y, Cho KH, Murakami G, Kawase T, Cho BH
(2012) Reconsideration of the autonomic cranial ganglia: an immu-
nohistochemical study of mid-term human fetuses. Anat Rec 295:
141–149

Kokubun S, Sato T, Yajima T, Ichikawa H (2019) Distribution of post-
ganglionic neurons which contain dopamine beta-hydroxylase, ty-
rosine hydroxylase, neuropeptide Y and vasoactive intestinal poly-
peptide in the human middle cervical ganglion. Tissue Cell 58:42–
50

Kondo M, Terada M, Shimizu D, Fujiwara T, Tabei R (1990)
Morphometric study of the superior cervical and stellate ganglia of
spontaneously hypertensive rats during the prehypertensive stage.
Virchows Archiv B, Cell Pathology Including Molecular
Pathology 58:371–376

Kraima AC, van Schaik J, Susan S, van de Velde CJ, Hamming JF, Lakke
EA, DeRuiter MC (2015) New insights in the neuroanatomy of the
human adult superior hypogastric plexus and hypogastric nerves.
Auton Neurosci 189:60–67

Krieger SM, Reimann M, Haase R, Henkel E, Hanefeld M, Ziemssen T
(2018) Sudomotor testing of diabetes polyneuropathy. Front Neurol
9:803

Kulesa PM, Lefcort F, Kasemeier-Kulesa JC (2009) The migration of
autonomic precursor cells in the embryo. Auton Neurosci 151:3–9
Kuwayama Y, Emson PC, Stone RA (1988) Pterygopalatine ganglion

cells contain neuropeptide Y. Brain Res 446:219–224

Landis S, Jackson PC, Fredien JR, Thibault J (1987) Catecholaminergic
properties of cholinergic neurons and synapses in adult rat ciliary
ganglion. J Neurosci 7:3574–3587

Landis SC (1988) Neurotransmitter plasticity in sympathetic neurons and
its regulation by environmental factors in vitro and in vivo. In:
Handbook of chemical neuroanatomy, Vol.6: the peripheral nervous
system (Björklund A, Hökfelt T, Owman C, eds), pp 65-115:
ELSEVIER.

Landis SC, Keefe D (1983) Evidence for neurotransmitter plasticity
in vivo: developmental changes in properties of cholinergic sympa-
thetic neurons. Dev Biol 98:349–372

Landis SC, Fredieu JR (1986) Coexistence of calcitonin gene-related
peptide and vasoactive intestinal peptide in cholinergic sympathetic
innervation of rat sweat glands. Brain Res 377:177–181

Langley JN (1921) The autonomic nervous system (Pt 1).
Leblanc G, Landis S (1986) Development of choline acetyltransferase
(CAT) in the sympathetic innervation of rat sweat glands. J
Neurosci 6:260–265

Leblanc GG, Landis SC (1989) Differentiation of noradrenergic traits in
the principal neurons and small intensely fluorescent cells of the
parasympathetic sphenopalatine ganglion of the rat. Dev Biol 131:
44–59

Leblanc GG, Trimmer BA, Landis SC (1987) Neuropeptide Y-like im-
munoreactivity in rat cranial parasympathetic neurons: coexistence
with vasoactive intestinal peptide and choline acetyltransferase. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 84:3511–3515

Levy DM, Karanth SS, Springall DR, Polak JM (1989) Depletion of
cutaneous nerves and neuropeptides in diabetes mellitus: an immu-
nocytochemical study. Diabetologia 32:427–433

Levy DM, Terenghi G, Gu XH, Abraham RR, Springall DR, Polak JM
(1992) Immunohistochemical measurements of nerves and

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

229

neuropeptides in diabetic skin: relationship to tests of neurological
function. Diabetologia 35:889–897

Li MZ, Masuko S (2001) Target specific organization and neuron types
of the dog pelvic ganglia: a retrograde-tracing and immunohisto-
chemical study. Arch Histol Cytol 64:267–280

Lim K-C, Lakshmanan G, Crawford SE, Gu Y, Grosveld F, Engel JD
(2000) Gata3 loss leads to embryonic lethality due to noradrenaline
deficiency of the sympathetic nervous system. Nat Genet 25:209–212
Lindh B, Lundberg JM, Hokfelt T (1989) NPY-, galanin-, VIP/PHI-,
CGRP- and substance P-immunoreactive neuronal subpopulations
in cat autonomic and sensory ganglia and their projections. Cell
Tissue Res 256:259–273

Lindh B, Hokfelt T, Elfvin LG, Terenius L, Fahrenkrug J, Elde R,
Goldstein M (1986) Topography of NPY-, somatostatin-, and VIP-
immunoreactive, neuronal subpopulations in the guinea pig celiac-
superior mesenteric ganglion and their projection to the pylorus. J
Neurosci 6:2371–2383

Liu Y, Billiet J, Ebenezer GJ, Pan B, Hauer P, Wei J, Polydefkis M
(2015) Factors influencing sweat gland innervation in diabetes.
Neurology 84:1652–1659

Lucas ME, Müller F, Rüdiger R, Henion PD, Rohrer H (2006) The bHLH
transcription factor hand2 is essential for noradrenergic differentia-
tion of sympathetic neurons. Development (Cambridge, England)
133:4015-4024.

Lundberg JM (1996) Pharmacology of cotransmission in the autonomic
nervous system: integrative aspects on amines, neuropeptides, aden-
osine triphosphate, amino acids and nitric oxide. Pharmacol Rev 48:
113–178

Lundberg JM, Hökfelt T, Änggard A, Terenius L, Elde R, Markey K,
Goldstein M, Kimmel J (1982) Organizational principles in the pe-
ripheral sympathetic nervous system: subdivision by coexisting pep-
tides (somatostatin-, avian pancreatic polypeptide-, and vasoactive
intestinal polypeptide-like immunoreactive materials). Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 79:1303-1307.

Masliukov PM, Timmermans JP (2004) Immunocytochemical properties
of stellate ganglion neurons during early postnatal development.
Histochem Cell Biol 122:201–209

Masliukov PM, Konovalov VV, Emanuilov AI, Nozdrachev AD (2012)
Development of neuropeptide Y-containing neurons in sympathetic
ganglia of rats. Neuropeptides 46:345–352

Masliukov PM, Emanuilov AI, Madalieva LV, Moiseev KY, Bulibin
AV, Korzina MB, Porseva VV, Korobkin AA, Smirnova VP
(2014) Development of nNOS-positive neurons in the rat sensory
and sympathetic ganglia. Neuroscience 256:271–281

Maslyukov PM, Korzina MB, Emanuilov AI, Shilkin VV (2010)
Neurotransmitter composition of neurons in the cranial cervical
and celiac sympathetic ganglia in postnatal ontogenesis. Neurosci
Behav Physiol 40:143–147

May CA, Neuhuber W, Lutjen-Drecoll E (2004) Immunohistochemical
classification and functional morphology of human choroidal gan-
glion cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 45:361–367

McCulloch PF (2012) Animal models for investigating the central control

of the mammalian diving response. Front Physiol 3:169

Melone MA, Pellegrino MJ, Nolano M, Habecker BA, Johansson S,
Nathanson NM, Knappskog PM, Hahn AF, Boman H (2014)
Unusual Stuve–Wiedemann syndrome with complete maternal
chromosome 5 isodisomy. Annals of Clinical and Translational
Neurology 1:926–932

Mendoza-Velasquez JJ, Flores-Vazquez JF, Barron-Velazquez E, Sosa-
Ortiz AL, Illigens BW, Siepmann T (2019) Autonomic dysfunction
in alpha-synucleinopathies. Front Neurol 10:363

Morales MA, Holmberg K, Xu ZQ, Cozzari C, Hartman BK, Emson P,
Goldstein M, Elfvin LG, Hökfelt T (1995) Localization of choline
acyltransferase in rat peripheral sympathetic neurons and its coexis-
tence with nitric oxide synthase and neuropeptides. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 92:11819–11823

Moriguchi T, Takako N, Hamada M, Maeda A, Fujioka Y, Kuroha T,
Huber RE, Hasegawa SL, Rao A, Yamamoto M, Takahashi S, Lim
KC, Engel JD (2006) Gata3 participates in a complex transcriptional
feedback network to regulate sympathoadrenal differentiation.
Development (Cambridge, England) 133:3871-3881.

Morikawa Y, D'Autreaux F, Gershon MD, Cserjesi P (2007) Hand2 de-
termines the noradrenergic phenotype in the mouse sympathetic
nervous system. Dev Biol 307:114–126

Morikawa Y, Dai YS, Hao JM, Bonin C, Hwang S, Cserjesi P (2005) The
basic helix-loop-helix factor Hand2 regulates autonomic nervous
system development. DevDyn 234:613–621

Morin X, Cremer H, Hirsch MR, Kapur RP, Goridis C, Brunet JF (1997)
Defects in sensory and autonomic ganglia and absence of locus
coeruleus in mice deficient for the homeobox gene Phox2a.
Neuron 18:411–423

Morris JL, Gibbins IL (1987) Neuronal colocalization of peptides, cate-
cholamines, and catecholamine-synthesizing enzymes in guinea pig
paracervical ganglia. J Neurosci 7:3117–3130

Morris JL, Kondo M, Gibbins IL (1997) Selective innervation of different
target tissues in guinea-pig cranial exocrine glands by sub-
populations of parasympathetic and sympathetic neurons. J Auton
Nerv Syst 66:75–86

Morris JL, Cunnane TC, Hirst GDS (1998) Regional differences in sym-
pathetic neurotransmission to cutaneous arteries in the guinea-pig
isolated ear. J Auton Nerv Syst 73:115–124

Motosugi H (1993) Immunohistochemical observation of neurotransmit-
ters in rat and human pterygopalatine ganglia. Nihon Jibiinkoka
Gakkai kaiho 96:936–945

Mountoufaris G, Canzio D, Nwakeze CL, Chen WV, Maniatis T (2018)
Writing, reading, and translating the clustered protocadherin cell
surface recognition code for neural circuit assembly. Annu Rev
Cell Dev Biol 34:471–493

Müller F, Rohrer H (2002) Molecular control of ciliary neuron develop-
ment: BMPs and downstream transcriptional control in the parasym-
pathetic lineage. Development (Cambridge, England) 129:5707-
5717.

Muraoka K, Morizane S, Hieda K, Honda M, Sejima T, Murakami G,
Abe SI, Takenaka A (2018) Site-dependent differences in the com-
posite fibers of male pelvic plexus branches: an immunohistochem-
ical analysis of donated elderly cadavers. BMC Urol 18:47

Nadelhaft I (2003) Cholinergic axons in the rat prostate and neurons in

the pelvic ganglion. Brain Res 989:52–57

Nishi R, Stubbusch J, Hulce JJ, Hruska M, Pappas A, Bravo MC, Huber
LP, Bakondi B, Soltys J, Rohrer H (2009) The cortistatin gene PSS2
rather than the somatostatin gene PSS1 is strongly expressed in
developing avian autonomic neurons. J Comp Neurol 518:839–850
Nozaki K, Moskowitz MA, Maynard KI, Koketsu N, Dawson TM, Bredt
DS, Snyder SH (2016) Possible origins and distribution of immuno-
reactive nitric oxide synthase-containing nerve fibers in cerebral
arteries. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 13(1):70–79

Olivas A, Gardner RT, Wang L, Ripplinger CM, Woodward WR,
Habecker BA (2016) Myocardial infarction causes transient cholin-
ergic transdifferentiation of cardiac sympathetic nerves via gp130. J
Neurosci 36:479–488

Ouajd S, Kamel B (2009) Physiological particularities of dromedary
(Camelus dromedarius) and experimental implications. Scand J
Lab Anim Sci 36

Ouslander JG (1992) Geriatric urinary incontinence. Disease-a-month :

DM 38:65–149

Papka RE, Traurig HH, Klenn P (1987) Paracervical ganglia of the female
rat: histochemistry and immunohistochemistry of neurons, SIF cells,
and nerve terminals. Am J Anat 179:243–257

Parr EJ, Sharkey KA (1996) Immunohistochemically-defined subtypes of
neurons in the inferior mesenteric ganglion of the guinea-pig. J
Auton Nerv Syst 59:140–150

230

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

Pattyn A, Guillemot F, Brunet JF (2006) Delays in neuronal differentia-

tion in Mash1/Ascl1 mutants. Dev Biol 295:67–75

Pattyn A, Morin X, Cremer H, Goridis C, Brunet JF (1997) Expression
and interactions of the two closely related homeobox genes Phox2a
and Phox2b during neurogenesis. Development (Cambridge,
England) 124:4065-4075.

Pattyn A, Morin X, Cremer H, Goridis C, Brunet J-F (1999) The homeo-
box gene Phox2b is essential for the development of all autonomic
derivatives of the neural crest. Nature 399:366–370

Patzke H, Reissmann E, Stanke M, Bixby JL, Ernsberger U (2001) BMP
growth factors and Phox2 transcription factors can induce synapto-
tagmin I and neurexin I during sympathetic neuron development.
Mech Dev 108:149–159

Peek SL, Mah KM, Weiner JA (2017) Regulation of neural circuit for-
mation by protocadherins. Cell Mol Life Sci 74:4133–4157
Persson K, Alm P, Uvelius B, Andersson KE (1998) Nitrergic and cho-
linergic innervation of the rat lower urinary tract after pelvic
ganglionectomy. Am J Phys 274:R389–R397

Peruzzi D, Hendley ED, Forehand CJ (1991) Hypertrophy of stellate
ganglion cells in hypertensive, but not hyperactive, rats. Am J
Phys 261:R979–R984

Pinter A, Cseh D, Sarkozi A, Illigens BM, Siepmann T (2015)
Autonomic dysregulation in multiple sclerosis. Int J Mol Sci 16:
16920–16952

Potzner MR, Tsarovina K, Binder E, Penzo-Mendez A, Lefebvre V,
Rohrer H, Wegner M, Sock E (2010) Sequential requirement of
Sox4 and Sox11 during development of the sympathetic nervous
system. Development (Cambridge, England) 137:775-784.

Properzi G, Francavilla S, Poccia G, Aloisi P, Gu XH, Terenghi G, Polak
JM (1993) Early increase precedes a depletion of VIP and PGP-9.5
in the skin of insulin-dependent diabetics—correlation between
quantitative immunohistochemistry and clinical assessment of pe-
ripheral neuropathy. J Pathol 169:269–277

Rafanelli M, Walsh K, Hamdan MH, Buyan-Dent L (2019) Autonomic
dysfunction: diagnosis and management. Handb Clin Neurol 167:
123–137

Reissmann E, Ernsberger U, Francis-West PH, Rueger D, Brickell PM,
Rohrer H (1996) Involvement of bone morphogenetic proteins-4
and -7 in the specification of the adrenergic phenotype in developing
sympathetic neurons. Development (Cambridge, England) 122:
2079-2088.

Rohrer H (2011) Transcriptional control of differentiation and
neurogenesis in autonomic ganglia. Eur J Neurosci 34:1563–1573
Roudenok V (2000) Changes in the expression of neuropeptide Y (NPY)
during maturation of human sympathetic ganglionic neurons: corre-
lations with tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity. Ann Anat 182:
515–519

Roudenok V, Schmitt O (2001) Upregulation of vasoactive intestinal
polypeptide (VIP) and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) ex-
pression in stellate ganglia of children with congenital cardiovascu-
lar lesions. Ann Anat 183:209–212

Roudenok V, Kuhnel W, Rogov Y, Nerovnja A (1999) Developmental
changes in vasoactive intestinal polypeptide immunoreactivity in the
human paravertebral ganglia. Ann Anat 181:561–565

Saari A, Tolonen U, Paakko E, Suominen K, Pyhtinen J, Sotaniemi KA,
Jauhiainen J, Myllyla VV (2008) Sympathetic skin responses in
multiple sclerosis. Acta Neurol Scand 118:226–231

Saffrey MJ, Hassall CJ, Moules EW, Burnstock G (1994) NADPH di-
aphorase and nitric oxide synthase are expressed by the majority of
intramural neurons in the neonatal guinea pig urinary bladder. J Anat
185(Pt 3):487–495

Sann H, McCarthy PW, Schemann M, Jurzak M, Poethke R, Pierau F-K
(1995) Choline acetyltransferase-immunoreactive neurones in a
prevertebral sympathetic ganglion, the inferior mesenteric ganglion.
J Auton Nerv Syst 54:195–205

Schalling M, Stieg PE, Lindquist C, Goldstein M, Hokfelt T (1989) Rapid
increase in enzyme and peptide mRNA in sympathetic ganglia after
electrical stimulation in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 86:
4302–4305

Schirar A, Chang C, Rousseau JP (1997) Localization of androgen recep-
tor in nitric oxide synthase- and vasoactive intestinal peptide-
containing neurons of the major pelvic ganglion innervating the rat
penis. J Neuroendocrinol 9:141–150

Schirar A, Giuliano F, Rampin O, Rousseau JP (1994) A large proportion
of pelvic neurons innervating the corpora cavernosa of the rat penis
exhibit NADPH-diaphorase activity. Cell Tissue Res 278:517–525
Schmidt M, Lin S, Pape M, Ernsberger U, Stanke M, Kobayashi K,
Howard MJ, Rohrer H (2009) The bHLH transcription factor
Hand2 is essential for the maintenance of noradrenergic properties
in differentiated sympathetic neurons. Dev Biol 329:191–200
Schmitt M, Kummer W, Heym C (1988) Calcitonin gene-related peptide
(CGRP)-immunoreactive neurons in the human cervico-thoracic
paravertebral ganglia. J Chem Neuroanat 1:287–292

Schneider C, Wicht H, Enderich J, Wegner M, Rohrer H (1999) Bone
morphogenetic proteins are required in vivo for the generation of
sympathetic neurons. Neuron 24:861–870

Scholander PF (1940) Experimental investigations on the respiratory
function in diving mammals and birds. Hvalradets Skrifter 22
Schotzinger RJ, Landis SC (1988) Cholinergic phenotype developed by
noradrenergic sympathetic neurons after innervation of a novel cho-
linergic target in vivo. Nature 335:637–639

Schotzinger RJ, Landis SC (1990) Acquisition of cholinergic and
peptidergic properties by sympathetic innervation of rat sweat
glands requires interaction with normal target. Neuron 5:91–100
Schotzinger RJ, Yin X, Landis S (1994) Target determination of neuro-
transmitter phenotype in sympathetic neurons. JNeurobiol 25:620–
639

S c h u l z e E , W i t t M , F i n k T , H o f e r A , F u n k R H ( 1 9 9 7 )
Immunohistochemical detection of human skin nerve fibers. Acta
Histochem 99:301–309

Searcy JAR (2017) Geriatric urinary incontinence. Nursing Clin North

Am 52:447–455

Shah NM, Groves AK, Anderson DJ (1996) Alternative neural crest cell
fates are instructively promoted by TGFb superfamily members.
Cell 85:331–343

Shanks J, Manou-Stathopoulou S, Lu CJ, Li D, Paterson DJ, Herring N
(2013) Cardiac sympathetic dysfunction in the prehypertensive
spontaneously hypertensive rat. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
305:H980–H986

Smet PJ, Edyvane KA, Jonavicius J, Marshall VR (1994) Distribution of
NADPH-diaphorase-positive nerves supplying the human urinary
bladder. J Auton Nerv Syst 47:109–113

Smet PJ, Jonavicius J, Marshall VR, de Vente J (1996a) Distribution of
nitric oxide synthase-immunoreactive nerves and identification of the
cellular targets of nitric oxide in guinea-pig and human urinary bladder
by cGMP immunohistochemistry. Neuroscience 71:337–348
Smet PJ, Edyvane KA, Jonavicius J, Marshall VR (1996b) Neuropeptides
and neurotransmitter-synthesizing enzymes in intrinsic neurons of
the human urinary bladder. J Neurocytol 25(1):112–124

Song ZM, Brookes SJ, Gibbins IL, Costa M (1994) NADPH-diaphorase
and other neuronal markers in nerves and ganglia supplying the
guinea-pig vas deferens. J Auton Nerv Syst 48:31–43

Stanke M, Geissen M, Götz R, Ernsberger U, Rohrer H (2000) The early
expression of VAChT and VIP in mouse sympathetic ganglia is not
induced by cytokines acting through LIFRb or CNTFRa. MechDev
91:91–96

Stanke M, Duong CV, Pape M, Geissen M, Burbach G, Deller T, Gascan
H, Otto C, Parlato R, Schütz G, Rohrer H (2006) Target-dependent
specification of the neurotransmitter phenotype: cholinergic differ-
entiation of sympathetic neurons is mediated in vivo by gp130 sig-
naling. Development (Cambridge, England) 133:141-150.

Cell Tissue Res (2020) 382:201–231

231

Stanzel S, Stubbusch J, Pataskar A, Howard MJ, Deller T, Ernsberger U,
Tiwari VK, Rohrer H, Tsarovina K (2016) Distinct roles of Hand2 in
developing and adult autonomic neurons. Dev Neurobiol

Sullivan KA, Traurig HH, Papka RE (1994) Ontogeny of neurotransmit-
ter systems in the paracervical ganglion and uterine cervix of the rat.
Anat Rec 240:377–386

Tajti J, Moller S, Uddman R, Bodi I, Edvinsson L (1999) The human
superior cervical ganglion: neuropeptides and peptide receptors.
Neurosci Lett 263:121–124

Takenaka A, Kawada M, Murakami G, Hisasue S, Tsukamoto T,
Fujisawa M (2005) Interindividual variation in distribution of extra-
mural ganglion cells in the male pelvis: a semi-quantitative and
immunohistochemical study concerning nerve-sparing pelvic sur-
gery. Eur Urol 48:46–52 discussion 52

Tamura M, Kagawa S, Tsuruo Y, Ishimura K, Kimura K, Kawanishi Y
(1997) Localization of NADPH diaphorase and vasoactive intestinal
polypeptide-containing neurons in the efferent pathway to the rat
corpus cavernosum. Eur Urol 32:100–104

Tan CMJ, Green P, Tapoulal N, Lewandowski AJ, Leeson P, Herring N
(2018) The role of neuropeptide Y in cardiovascular health and
disease. Front Physiol 9:1281

Teshima THN, Tucker AS, Lourenco SV (2019) Dual sympathetic input

into developing salivary glands. J Dent Res 98:1122–1130

Tsarovina K, Pattyn A, Stubbusch J, Müller F, Van der Wees J, Schneider
C, Brunet JF, Rohrer H (2004) Essential role of Gata transcription
factors in sympathetic neuron development. Development
(Cambridge, England) 131:4775-4786.

Tsarovina K, Reiff T, Stubbusch J, Kurek D, Grosveld FG, Parlato R,
Schutz G, Rohrer H (2010) The Gata3 transcription factor is re-
quired for the survival of embryonic and adult sympathetic neurons.
J Neurosci 30:10833–10843

Tyrrell S, Landis SC (1994) The appearance of NPY and VIP in sympa-
thetic neuroblasts and subsequent alterations in their expression. J
Neurosci 14:4529–4547

Uddman R, Tajti J, Moller S, Sundler F, Edvinsson L (1999) Neuronal
messengers and peptide receptors in the human sphenopalatine and
otic ganglia. Brain Res 826:193–199

van Groningen T et al (2017) Neuroblastoma is composed of two super-
enhancer-associated differentiation states. Nat Genet 49:1261–1266
VanDusen NJ, Vincentz JW, Firulli BA, Howard MJ, Rubart M, Firulli
AB (2014) Loss of Hand2 in a population of periostin lineage cells
results in pronounced bradycardia and neonatal death. Dev Biol 388:
149–158

Vincentz JW, VanDusen NJ, Fleming AB, Rubart M, Firulli BA, Howard
MJ, Firulli AB (2012) A Phox2- and Hand2-dependent Hand1 cis-
regulatory element reveals a unique gene dosage requirement for
Hand2 during sympathetic neurogenesis. J Neurosci 32:2110–2120
Vinik AI, Nevoret ML, Casellini C (2015) The new age of sudomotor
function testing: a sensitive and specific biomarker for diagnosis,
estimation of severity, monitoring progression, and regression in
response to intervention. Front Endocrinol 6:94

von Euler US (1966) Twenty years of noradrenaline. Pharmacol Rev 18:

29–38

Wagg A (2018) Anticholinergics for overactive bladder in frail and med-
ically complex older people: the case for. Drugs Aging 35:777–780
Wang W, Lo P, Frasch M, Lufkin T (2000) Hmx: an evolutionary con-
served homeobox gene family expressed in the developing nervous
system in mice and Drosophila. Mech Dev 99:123–137

Wanigasekara Y, Kepper ME, Keast JR (2003) Immunohistochemical
characterisation of pelvic autonomic ganglia in male mice. Cell
Tissue Res 311:175–185

Warburton AL, Santer RM (1993) Localisation of NADPH-diaphorase
and acetylcholinesterase activities and of tyrosine hydroxylase and
neuropeptide-Y immunoreactivity in neurons of the hypogastric
ganglion of young adult and aged rats. J Auton Nerv Syst 45:155–
163

Warn JD, Fan Q, Smith PG (1997) Decreased neuronal nitric oxide
synthase-immunoreactivity and NADPH-diaphorase activity in rat
pterygopalatine ganglion parasympathetic neurons and cerebrovas-
cular innervation following long-term sympathectomy. Neurosci
Lett 232:25–28

Weihe E, Schafer MK, Schutz B, Anlauf M, Depboylu C, Brett C, Chen
L, Eiden LE (1998) From the cholinergic gene locus to the cholin-
ergic neuron. J Physiol Paris 92:385–388

Werkstrom V, Alm P, Persson K, Andersson KE (1998) Inhibitory inner-
vation of the guinea-pig urethra; roles of CO, NO and VIP. J Auton
Nerv Syst 74:33–42

Wiese CB, Deal KK, Ireland SJ, Cantrell VA, Southard-Smith EM (2017)
Migration pathways of sacral neural crest during development of
lower urogenital tract innervation. Dev Biol 429:356–369

Wiese CB, Ireland S, Fleming NL, Yu J, Valerius MT, Georgas K, Chiu
HS, Brennan J, Armstrong J, Little MH, McMahon AP, Southard-
Smith EM (2012) A genome-wide screen to identify transcription
factors expressed in pelvic ganglia of the lower urinary tract. Front
Neurosci 6:130

Wildner H, Gierl MS, Strehle M, Pla P, Birchmeier C (2008) Insm1 (IA-
1) is a crucial component of the transcriptional network that controls
differentiation of the sympatho-adrenal lineage. Development
(Cambridge, England) 135:473-481.

Winslow JB (1732) Exposition anatomique de la structure du corps humain.
Woodford HJ (2018) Anticholinergic drugs for overactive bladder in frail

older patients: the case against. Drugs Aging 35:773–776

Wozniak W, Skowronska U (1967) Comparative anatomy of pelvic plex-
us in cat, dog, rabbit, macaque and man. Anat Anz 120:457–473
Yamauchi A, Lever JD (1971) Correlations between formol fluorescence
and acetylcholinesterase (AChE) staining in the superior cervical
ganglion of normal rat, pig and sheep. J Anat 110:435–443
Yan H, Keast JR (2008) Neurturin regulates postnatal differentiation of
parasympathetic pelvic ganglion neurons, initial axonal projections,
and maintenance of terminal fields in male urogenital organs. J
Comp Neurol 507:1169–1183

Yoshimura N, Miyazato M (2012) Neurophysiology and therapeutic re-
ceptor targets for stress urinary incontinence. Int J Urol 19:524–537
Yoshiura K, Leysens NJ, Reiter RS, Murray JC (1998) Cloning, charac-
terization, and mapping of the mouse homeobox gene Hmx1.
Genomics 50:61–68

Young HM, Anderson RB, Anderson CR (2004) Guidance cues involved
in the development of the peripheral autonomic nervous system.
Auton Neurosci 112:1–14

Zeisel A, Hochgerner H, Lonnerberg P, Johnsson A, Memic F, van der
Zwan J, Haring M, Braun E, Borm LE, La Manno G, Codeluppi S,
Furlan A, Lee K, Skene N, Harris KD, Hjerling-Leffler J, Arenas E,
Ernfors P, Marklund U, Linnarsson S (2018) Molecular Architecture
of the Mouse Nervous System. Cell 174(999-1014):e1022

Zhou Y, Ling EA (1998) Colocalization of nitric oxide synthase and
some neurotransmitters in the intramural ganglia of the guinea pig
urinary bladder. J Comp Neurol 394:496–505

Ziemssen T, Siepmann T (2019) The investigation of the cardiovascular and
sudomotor autonomic nervous system—a review. Front Neurol 10:53

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

